[SYCL][Doc] Design doc: optional kernel features (#3781)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/OptionalDeviceFeatures.md

optional kernel features.

The requirements for this design come mostly from the SYCL 2020 specification
[section 5.7 "Optional kernel features"][1] but they also encompass the C++
attribute `[[sycl::requires()]]` that is described in [section 5.8.1 "Kernel
attributes"][2] and [section 5.8.2 "Device function attributes"][3].

[1]: <https://www.khronos.org/registry/SYCL/specs/sycl-2020/html/sycl-2020.html#sec:optional-kernel-features>
[2]: <https://www.khronos.org/registry/SYCL/specs/sycl-2020/html/sycl-2020.html#sec:kernel.attributes>
[3]: <https://www.khronos.org/registry/SYCL/specs/sycl-2020/html/sycl-2020.html#_device_function_attributes>

## Requirements

There are several categories of requirements covered by this design:

* The front-end compiler must issue a diagnostic in some cases when a kernel
  uses an optional feature.  However, the front-end compiler must **not**
  generate a diagnostic in other cases.

* The runtime must raise an exception when a kernel using optional features
  is submitted to a device that does not support those features.  This
  exception must be raised synchronously from the kernel invocation command
  (e.g. `parallel_for()`).

> 

Reviewer: Behavior of the special case - kernel_bundle::compile() and link() - needs to be described too. Maybe in 2020 spec too.

general, the front-end compiler must not issue any diagnostic simply because a
kernel uses an optional feature.

The only exception to this rule occurs when the application uses the C++
attribute `[[sycl::requires()]]`.  When the application decorates a kernel or
device function with this attribute, it is an assertion that the kernel or
device function is expected to use *only* the features listed by the attribute.
Therefore, the front-end compiler must issue a diagnostic if the kernel or
device function uses any other optional kernel features.

Note that this behavior does not change when the compiler runs in AOT mode.
Even if the user specifies a target device via "-fsycl-targets", that does not
necessarily mean that the user expects all the code in the application to be
runnable on that device.  Consider an application that uses some middleware
library, where the library's header contains kernels optimized for different
devices.  An application should be able to compile in AOT mode with this
library without getting errors.  Therefore the AOT compiler must not fail
simply because the middleware header contains device code for devices that

> are not being compiled for.

Author: I agree that we need some solution for kernels that contain asm statements.  I could either include that as part of this design, or we could create a separate design for it later if we think it will be a can of worms.

How do we handle asm statements now?  Are they supported in JIT mode?  If so, it seems like we must already have a way to represent them in LLVM IR and in SPIR-V.  What does the device compiler do today with asm statements?  If there is already general way to represent asm statements in LLVM IR / SPIR-V, then it seems like the device compiler might not do anything special beyond checking their syntax.  Is that the case?

> are not being compiled for.

Author: Yes, I agree that is probably makes sense to require the user to add `[[sycl::requires()]]` to any kernel (or device function) that uses an asm statement.  To enable this, we would need to define extended aspects which correspond to each device type.  There would need to be a correspondence between each asm instruction and one of the aspect values.  I don't know the asm syntax very well.  For example, do all GEN devices accept the same asm instructions, or does each generation have its own set of instructions?  Can you propose a list of aspects that would cover the set of devices we want to support?  I can draft a DPC++ extension specification for these new aspects.  I've been thinking about doing this anyways, so now seems like a good time.

Of course, it would be more user friendly if the front-end compiler could automatically deduce the aspect requirement from the asm statement itself.  This way, the user wouldn't be required to add the `[[sycl::requires()]]` attribute manually.  That seems like it would be hard for the compiler to do, though, because it would need to recognize all possible asm instructions from all possible devices.  Am I correct in thinking that this is too difficult?

> are not being compiled for.

Reviewer 2: > Am I correct in thinking that this is too difficult?

Absolutely. :-)

### Runtime exception if device doesn't support feature

> When the application submits a kernel to a device via one of the the kernel

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When the application submits a kernel to a device via one of the kernel
```

> invocation commands (e.g. `parallel_for()`), the runtime must check to see

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
invocation commands (e.g. `parallel_for()`), the runtime must check
```

if the kernel uses optional features that are not supported on that device.

> If the kernel uses a feature that is not supported, the runtime must throw

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the kernel uses an unsupported feature, the runtime must throw
```

a synchronous `errc::kernel_not_supported` exception.

> This exception must be thrown in the following circumstances:

Author: The required behavior for AOT and JIT cases are the same.  The last paragraph in the section "Diagnostics from the front-end compiler" already notes that the behavior for reporting errors is the same in AOT and JIT modes, and it gives a motivation for why this is the case.

Answering your specific question, if an application submits a kernel to a device that does not support its features, the runtime must throw `errc::kernel_not_supported`.  This behavior is required in both JIT and AOT cases.  The sections below that describe the design show how this behavior falls out naturally.

> This exception must be thrown in the following circumstances:

Author: > So in addition to not AOT-compiling there should be some hint from the compiler to runtime that submission of A should trigger 'kernel not supported' even w/o having A in the device binary image.

Yes, I think the "SYCL/requirements" property set provides this information.  See the last paragraph in the section titled "AOT case".  The runtime uses information from that property set to raise `errc::kernel_not_supported` before it attempts to find the kernel in the device image.

P.S.: Feel free to resolve this conversation if you think the issue is resolved.

> * A device function in the kernel's static call tree uses a feature that the

Author: I reworded these bullets to more explicitly cover those two cases.  I also added another case where an exception is required.  See 333bf432e75db.

  device does not support.  However, this only applies to features that are
  exposed via a C++ type or function.  Examples of this include `sycl::half` or
  instantiating `sycl::atomic_ref` for a 64-bit type.  In cases where the
  feature is more "notional", such as requiring a particular type of forward

>   progress guarantee, no exception is required.

Reviewer 3: Could a more particular example of an optional forward progress guarantee be provided here? Or is it better for users to rely on the SYCL-2020 spec itself?

Author: I reworded to reference the sub-group forward progress guarantee in 333bf432e75db.

image uses a feature that is not supported by device D.

## Design to implement required diagnostics

### Changes to DPC++ headers

With the exception of the `[[sycl::reqd_work_group_size()]]` and
`[[sycl::reqd_sub_group_size()]]` attributes, all kernel optional features
are associated with some device aspect.  For example, the `sycl::half` type
is an optional feature which is only supported on devices that have the
`aspect::fp16` aspect.  We can therefore use device aspects as a way to
describe the set of optional features that a kernel uses (with the exception
of the required work-group or sub-group size).

As will see later, it will be very helpful to decorate all APIs in DPC++
headers that correspond to optional kernel features with the
`[[sycl::requires()]]` attribute.  For example, the declaration of the
`sycl::half` type would look like this:

```
using half [[sycl::requires(has(aspect::fp16))]] = cl::sycl::detail::half_impl::half;
```

In cases where the optional feature corresponds to use of a class (e.g.
`sycl::atomic_ref`), the declaration can look like this:

```
template</*...*/>
class [[sycl::requires(has(aspect::fp64))]] atomic_ref {
  /* ... */
};
```

> (We can use partial specialization tricks to decorate `atomic_ref` with the

Author: The code using partial specialization is long, so I don't want to it to distract from the focus of this section of the design.  Instead, I added it as an appendix.  See eed9bc693b4d3ae3404c89245778e38b7e6733da.

attribute only when the underlying type is 64-bits.)

In cases where the optional feature corresponds to a function, we can decorate
the function's declaration with the attribute like so (demonstrating a
hypothetical AMX multiplication extension):

```
[[sycl::requires(has(aspect::ext_intel_amx))]]
void amx_multiply();
```

These attributes provide an explicit mapping between each optional kernel
feature and its associated aspect.

Unfortunately, the fundamental type `double` is also an optional kernel
feature.  Since there is no type alias for `double`, there is no convenient
place to add an attribute.  Instead, the front-end device compiler must behave
as though there was an implicit `[[sycl::requires(has(aspect::fp64))]]`
attribute for any device code that uses the `double` type.

Note that the usage of `[[sycl::requires()]]` is slightly expanded here beyond
the specified usage in the SYCL 2020 specification because we allow the

> attribute also on type alias declarations and class declarations.  If a device

Author: I think we should not update the 2020 spec to include this behavior because:

* It's not clear to me that this expanded behavior that I describe is useful for application developers.  I can see how it's useful for vendors to implement SYCL, but this is not a reason to expose it to applications as part of the supported API.

* We are reconsidering whether we want to rely so heavily on C++ attributes in future versions of the SYCL spec.  I'd rather not add more attributes to SYCL 2020.

* SYCL 2020 is already ratified, so we need a stronger motivation to add new features at this point.

Perhaps you are concerned about expanding the meaning of `[[sycl::requires()]]` without documenting the new behavior to users.  I also share this concern.  See my TODO below.  If we feel it is bad practice to expand the semantics of `[[sycl::requires()]]` beyond what we document to users, then we can instead introduce a new C++ attribute for this purpose, which we do NOT document to users.  For example, we could name it `[[intel::type_requires()]]` or `[[sycl_detail::type_requires()]]`.

> attribute also on type alias declarations and class declarations.  If a device

Author: > I was not aware that end-users were not supposed to use this extension directly. Do you think there are no scenarios where it is needed?

Correct, I do not expect end-users to rely on this extended behavior of `[[sycl::requires()]]`, and I don't see a compelling use case right now.

Let's ask @erichkeane and @AaronBallman for their opinion about whether we should define a new (internal) attribute or extend the semantic of this existing attribute.  I would also like to get your review for this design in general, especially the parts that affect the compiler front-end.

> attribute also on type alias declarations and class declarations.  If a device

Reviewer: > Please note that this document is not an extension specification, but rather an implementation design

It references an unspecified feature which could be potentially user-visible (extending the `requires` attribute usage beyond specification), so I would generally see at as a problem, unless it is really not usable by end-users.

> attribute also on type alias declarations and class declarations.  If a device

Author: After reading this conversation, I think it would be better to define a new internal attribute rather than expanding the definition of `sycl::requires`.  We already have a precedent for defining an internal (undocumented) attribute: `__attribute__((sycl_device))`, which is used in the expansion of `SYCL_EXTERNAL`.  I propose that the base name of this new attribute should be `type_requires`, but I'm open to the exact spelling:

* It could be `__attribute__((sycl_type_requires(aspect)))`, to match the existing `sycl_device` attribute.

* It could be `[[__sycl::type_requires(aspect)]]`, using the modern C++ attribute syntax and defining a new internal `__sycl::` attribute namespace.

Personally, I like the second option, but this is not the direction we chose for `sycl_device`.

One advantage to defining a new internal attribute for this purpose is to allow a "pedantic" mode that will warn the user of incorrect usage of the documented `[[sycl::requires()]]` attribute.

> attribute also on type alias declarations and class declarations.  If a device

Reviewer: + 1 for second and __sycl - style. Maybe even `sycl::detail::type_requires`

> attribute also on type alias declarations and class declarations.  If a device

Author: Unfortunately, C++ does not allow multiple levels of namespace attributes, so `sycl::detail::` is not possible.  If we use the modern C++ attribute syntax, we need to define a single attribute namespace for these internal attributes.

> attribute also on type alias declarations and class declarations.  If a device

Reviewer: I don't have any strong preference. 1 more variant - `sycl_detail::`.

> attribute also on type alias declarations and class declarations.  If a device

Author: I also don't have a strong preference.  I suppose `sycl_detail` has a similar name to the regular C++ namespace `sycl::detail` which is reserved for implementation details, so I'm happy to go with that.

Whatever we choose for an attribute namespace here, we should use for all other internal DPC++ attributes going forward.

> attribute also on type alias declarations and class declarations.  If a device

Reviewer 2: How about a name like `__sycl_internal__`? I think that's more scary for users to write than `sycl_detail` and so they may be more likely to not try using it themselves.

> attribute also on type alias declarations and class declarations.  If a device

Author: I have a slight preference for using the word "detail" rather than "internal", only because we've already set a precedent for "detail" with the internal namespace `sycl::detail`.

Out of curiosity, is there some rule (or precedent) for when you use no leading `__`, leading `__` AND trailing `__`, vs. just leading `__`?  For example, would it be better to name the attribute namespace `__sycl_detail` or `__sycl_detail__`?

> attribute also on type alias declarations and class declarations.  If a device

Reviewer 2: I'd be fine with `__sycl_detail__` as well, FWIW.

> Out of curiosity, is there some rule (or precedent) for when you use no leading __, leading __ AND trailing __, vs. just leading __? For example, would it be better to name the attribute namespace __sycl_detail or __sycl_detail__?

It's... a mess. :-D

The general rule is: code that exists as part of the implementation (C standard library, CXX standard library, intrinsic headers, SYCL, POSIX, etc) should be using reserved names for anything that's not part of the public API. This is done so that the implementation does not have to worry about user-defined macros causing the implementation headers to translate differently. That goes for all the identifiers, including attribute names, template parameters, function parameter names, private data members, everything in detail namespaces, etc.

For attributes specifically, to help implementers out, both GCC and Clang allow you to surround attributes with double square brackets. e.g., `__attribute__((__deprecated__("don't use this")))` and `__attribute__((deprecated("don't use this")))` are identical. When C++-style attributes were added, the same shenanigans were allowed there, but extended to also cover the vendor namespace. Thus, `[[clang::whatever]]`, `[[clang::__whatever__]]`, `[[__clang__::whatever]]`, and `[[__clang__::__whatever__]]` are also identical.

Unfortunately, sometimes these reserved names leak out into user code these days, like with `__has_cpp_attribute` or `__has_include`, which are perfectly fine for users to use because they're standardized features. But aside from some special cases like that, programmers typically understand that using something with a `__reserved` name means they're fiddling with something that doesn't belong to them and shouldn't be sad if their code breaks as a result.

> attribute also on type alias declarations and class declarations.  If a device

Author: I'm planning to use the name `uses_aspects` for this internal attribute, so the full name would be `[[__sycl_detail__::uses_aspects()]]`.  However, given when you say above, I guess I should name it instead as `[[__sycl_detail__::__uses_aspects__()]]`.  Correct?

> attribute also on type alias declarations and class declarations.  If a device

Reviewer 2: Kinda probably not but maybe sorta who knows? ;-)

Clang *automatically* supports the double underscore bits, so I suppose you could name it `[[sycl_detail::uses_aspects()]]` in the FE, but from within the SYCL headers, you always use `[[__sycl_detail__::__uses_aspects__()]]`. We could also force the double underscores so no one ever forgets to use the protected name, and thus the FE would name it `[[__sycl_detail__::__uses_aspects__()]]` and it would be possible for someone to just slap a ridiculous number of underscores onto it as `[[____sycl_detail____::____uses_aspects____()]]` thanks to the automagical double underscore behavior.

I was thinking we'd have the FE name it `[[__sycl_detail__::uses_aspects()]]` just so that users can't use `sycl_detail` thinking it is a valid thing for them, but the library would use `[[__sycl_detail__::__uses_aspects__()]]`. But it would probably be fine to name it `[[sycl_detail::uses_aspects()]]` and just use the double underscores within the SYCL headers, too.

> attribute also on type alias declarations and class declarations.  If a device

Author: I'd like this design document to use the same name that we will write in the DPC++ headers.  I think you are saying that this will be the form with double underscores on both the namespace and the attribute: `[[__sycl_detail__::__uses_aspects__()]]`.  Correct?

> attribute also on type alias declarations and class declarations.  If a device

Reviewer 2: Yes, that's correct, but may cause some confusion too. We want the DPC++ headers to use `[[__sycl__::__requires__()]]` for the same reason, but users are welcome to use `[[sycl::requires()]]` for their own code. I suspect we can use some prose to make sure this is sufficiently clear, though.

FWIW, the double underscore thing is more of a policy issue that's wider than this design doc. I filed https://github.com/intel/llvm/issues/3677 to track that as more of a general concern with the DPC++ headers.

following information:

* The source position of the `[[sycl::requires()]]` attribute that decorates
  the kernel or device function which provides the `Allowed` aspect set.  This
  tells the user which aspects the kernel or device function intends to use.

* The source position of the call to a function that is decorated with
  `[[sycl::requires()]]` or the source position of the use of a type that is
  decorated with `[[sycl::requires()]]`.  This tells the user where in the
  kernel a particular aspect is actually used.

Note that this analysis can be done in the front-end compiler even when a
kernel makes a call to a function that is in another translation unit.
Language rules require the application to declare such a function with
`SYCL_EXTERNAL` in the calling TU, and the `SYCL_EXTERNAL` declaration must be
decorated with the `[[sycl::requires()]]` attribute.  Therefore, the front-end
can diagnose errors with aspect usage even without seeing the definition of the
`SYCL_EXTERNAL` function.

## Design to raise required exceptions (and avoid forbidden errors)

As described above the runtime must raise an `errc::kernel_not_supported`

> exception when a kernel is submitted to a device that does not support the

Reviewer: note similar to above, regarding kernel_bundle::compile/link

optional features that the kernel uses.  Likewise, the runtime must **not**
raise an exception (or otherwise produce an error) due to speculative
compilation of a kernel for a device, unless the application actually submits
the kernel to that device.  The solution is largely the same for both JIT and
AOT cases.

### JIT case

> The JIT case requires some change to the way kernels are bundled together into

Reviewer: In some scenarios binary image may contain no kernels, only external functions (e.g. a dynamic library), but problems outlined below, as well some of as the diagnostic rules still apply. So I suggest to replace 'kernels' with 'functions' where it is applicable. Like here.

Author: Good point, thanks.  I updated the design to include details about how this will work when we have exported device functions in shared libraries.  See cda2d8ff750acc1142bb9ab21bd466ed4d23781a.

device images.  Currently, kernels are bundled together regardless of the
features they use, and this can lead to JIT errors due to speculative
compilation.  Consider a device image that contains two kernels: `K1` uses no
optional features and `K2` uses an optional feature that corresponds to aspect
`A`.  Now consider that the application submits kernel `K1` to a device that
does not support aspect `A`.  Since the two kernels are bundled together into
one device image, the runtime really compiles both kernels for the device.
Currently, this will raise a JIT exception because the compilation of kernel
`K2` will fail when compiled for a device that does not support aspect `A`.

There are two ways to solve this problem.  One is to change the way kernels are
bundled into device images such that we never bundled two kernels together
unless they required exactly the same set of device aspects.  Doing this would
avoid the error described above.  However, we have elected for a different
solution.

Instead, we will allow kernels to be bundled together as they currently are,
but we will introduce extra decorations into the generated SPIR-V that allow

> the JIT compiler to discard kernels which require aspects that the device does

Reviewer: +100 for requiring BE (JIT) to honor required aspects! That's the right way, I believe.

that is supported by some devices and not by others.  For example, not all
devices support 16-bit floating point operations, so the `sycl::half` data type
is an optional kernel feature.  Some DPC++ extensions like AMX are also
optional kernel features.

The requirements for this design come mostly from the SYCL 2020 specification
[section 5.7 "Optional kernel features"][1] but they also encompass the C++
attribute `[[sycl::requires()]]` that is described in [section 5.8.1 "Kernel
attributes"][2] and [section 5.8.2 "Device function attributes"][3].

[1]: <https://www.khronos.org/registry/SYCL/specs/sycl-2020/html/sycl-2020.html#sec:optional-kernel-features>
[2]: <https://www.khronos.org/registry/SYCL/specs/sycl-2020/html/sycl-2020.html#sec:kernel.attributes>
[3]: <https://www.khronos.org/registry/SYCL/specs/sycl-2020/html/sycl-2020.html#_device_function_attributes>

## Requirements

There are several categories of requirements covered by this design:

* The front-end compiler must issue a diagnostic in some cases when a kernel or
  device function uses an optional feature.  However, the front-end compiler

>   must **not** generate a diagnostic in other cases.

Author: I added a sentence stating that these initial requirements are just an overview, and that they are explained in detail later.  See 2b51cf572fb0b92f7257968dcdad589639ab7bfb.

* The runtime must raise an exception when a kernel using optional features
  is submitted to a device that does not support those features.  This
  exception must be raised synchronously from the kernel invocation command

>   (e.g. `parallel_for()`).

Reviewer 2: What happens if the user disables exceptions in the FE? (This is sort of a general question about SYCL moreso than this specific design document.)

Author: There are many places in the SYCL spec that mandate an exception to be thrown in various cases.  If the user disables exceptions, I suppose the implementation is no longer conformant.

There are places in the C++ runtime that mandate an exception also.  Doesn't that have the same issue if the user disables exceptions?

Reviewer 2: The C++ standard doesn't admit that C++ is a thing without exceptions, so when users disable them in the compiler, they're technically compiling something C++-like but not really C++. But compilers generally disallow the user from throwing in that case (https://godbolt.org/z/TbPqKqv4c). If you can trick the compiler into throwing anyway, you get UB that may surprise you (https://godbolt.org/z/TbPqKqv4c) -- note that this comes from the ABI (https://itanium-cxx-abi.github.io/cxx-abi/abi-eh.html#cxx-aux).

I suppose in this case, the exception is thrown from the host side and expected to be caught from the host side, so the UB is what it is. I was more wondering whether there are cases where we throw from the device and the SYCL runtime expects to catch on the host side, and what we do when exceptions are disabled in that circumstance? But that's getting pretty far afield from this design doc, so don't feel obligated to answer/care. :-)

Author: > I was more wondering whether there are cases where we throw from the device and the SYCL runtime expects to catch on the host side

SYCL does not allow device code to throw C++ exceptions, so this situation cannot occur.  (SYCL disallows certain C++ features in device code, and exceptions are one such feature.)

If you don't mind, I'll mark this conversation resolved later today.  I'm trying to clean up the comment threads.

Reviewer 2: Excellent to hear, thank you! I'll mark this as resolved now as there's nothing to be done for it.

* The runtime must not raise an exception (or otherwise fail) merely due to
  speculative compilation of a kernel for a device, when the application does
  not specifically submit the kernel to that device.

### Diagnostics from the front-end compiler

By "front-end compiler", we mean the DPC++ compiler which parses DPC++ source
code, not the JIT compiler that translates SPIR-V into native code.

In general, the front-end compiler does not know which kernels the application
will submit to which devices.  Therefore, the front-end compiler does not
generally know which optional features a kernel can legally use.  Thus, in
general, the front-end compiler must not issue any diagnostic simply because a
kernel uses an optional feature.

The only exception to this rule occurs when the application uses the C++
attribute `[[sycl::requires()]]`.  When the application decorates a kernel or
device function with this attribute, it is an assertion that the kernel or
device function is allowed to use only those optional features which are listed
by the attribute.  Therefore, the front-end compiler must issue a diagnostic if

> the kernel or device function uses any other optional kernel features.

Reviewer 4: What does "kernel or device function uses any other optional kernel features" mean? Does it mean that diagnostic should be emitted if functions called from this kernel/device function are decorated with aspects not mentioned in parent list?

Note that this behavior does not change when the compiler runs in AOT mode.
Even if the user specifies a target device via "-fsycl-targets", that does not
necessarily mean that the user expects all the code in the application to be
runnable on that device.  Consider an application that uses some middleware
library, where the library's header contains kernels optimized for different
devices.  An application should be able to compile in AOT mode with this
library without getting errors.  Therefore the AOT compiler must not fail
simply because the middleware header contains device code for devices that
are not being compiled for.

### Runtime exception if device doesn't support feature

When the application submits a kernel to a device via one of the kernel
invocation commands (e.g. `parallel_for()`), the runtime must check if the
kernel uses optional features that are not supported on that device.  If the
kernel uses an unsupported feature, the runtime must throw a synchronous
`errc::kernel_not_supported` exception.

This exception must be thrown in the following circumstances:

* For a kernel that is not decorated with `[[sycl::requires()]]`: the exception

>   must be thrown if a device function in the kernel's static call tree uses a

Author: I did this in 2b51cf572fb0b92f7257968dcdad589639ab7bfb.  There is now a new sub-section under "Requirements" describing what it means to form the kernel's static call tree.

  feature that the device does not support.  However, this only applies to
  features that are exposed via a C++ type or function.  Examples of this
  include `sycl::half` or instantiating `sycl::atomic_ref` for a 64-bit type.
  If the kernel relies on optional features that are more "notional" such as
  sub-group independent forward progress
  (`info::device::sub_group_independent_forward_progress`), no exception is
  required.

* For a kernel that is decorated with `[[sycl::requires()]]`: the exception
  must be thrown if the device does not have the aspects listed in that
  attribute.  Note that the exception must be thrown even if the kernel does
  not actually use a feature corresponding to the aspect, and it must be

>   thrown even if the aspect does not correspond to any optional feature.

Reviewer 2: How does the runtime know what aspects are listed in the attribute -- there's no reflection over attributes?

Reviewer 5: Those attributes are expected to be lowered into metadata/attributes at LLVM IR level and `sycl-post-link` together with `clang-offload-wrapper` will embed them into device image properties, which are available to DPC++ RT.

Reviewer 2: Ah, so the reflection is generated by later stages in the pipeline, good to know. Thanks!

an exception in such a case just because some other kernel in the same device
image uses a feature that is not supported by device D.

## Design to implement required diagnostics

### Changes to DPC++ headers

With the exception of the `[[sycl::reqd_work_group_size()]]` and
`[[sycl::reqd_sub_group_size()]]` attributes, all kernel optional features
are associated with some device aspect.  For example, the `sycl::half` type
is an optional feature which is only supported on devices that have the
`aspect::fp16` aspect.  We can therefore use device aspects as a way to
describe the set of optional features that a kernel uses (with the exception
of the required work-group or sub-group size).

As we will see later, it will be very helpful to decorate all APIs in DPC++
headers that correspond to optional kernel features with the
`[[sycl::requires()]]` attribute.  For example, the declaration of the
`sycl::half` type would look like this:

```
using half [[sycl::requires(has(aspect::fp16))]] = cl::sycl::detail::half_impl::half;
```

In cases where the optional feature corresponds to use of a class (e.g.
`sycl::atomic_ref`), the declaration can look like this:

```
template</*...*/>

> class [[sycl::requires(has(aspect::atomic64))]] atomic_ref {

Author: I saw your previous comment.  My response might be hidden because I marked the conversation "resolved".  I agree with what you say, but I don't want to put a long code snippet at this point in the document because it will take attention away from the main point of this section.  Instead, I added an example of the partial specialization that will be needed in an appendix at the end of the document.  I also added a note just a few line below here that points to that appendix.

> class [[sycl::requires(has(aspect::atomic64))]] atomic_ref {

Reviewer: This example then should better be replaced or removed, in my opinion, but I'll leave this to you to decide.

> class [[sycl::requires(has(aspect::atomic64))]] atomic_ref {

Author: I replaced the example with a simpler one, but kept the appendix showing how `atomic_ref` can be specialized to only use the attribute for an 8-byte type.

void amx_multiply();
```

These attributes provide an explicit mapping between each optional kernel
feature and its associated aspect.

Unfortunately, the fundamental type `double` is also an optional kernel
feature.  Since there is no type alias for `double`, there is no convenient
place to add an attribute.  Instead, the front-end device compiler must behave
as though there was an implicit `[[sycl::requires(has(aspect::fp64))]]`
attribute for any device code that uses the `double` type.

Note that the usage of `[[sycl::requires()]]` is slightly expanded here beyond
the specified usage in the SYCL 2020 specification because we allow the
attribute also on type alias declarations and class declarations.  If a device
function does any of the following with a type alias or class that was so
decorated, the function is assumed to "use the aspects" listed in the
attribute:

* Declares a variable of that type.
* Has a formal parameter declared with that type.
* Returns that type.

This also includes any qualified version of the type.

**TODO**: This language is not very precise.  The intent is to include most
uses of the type, except for cases like `sizeof(T)` or `decltype(T)`.  Help

> appreciated on tightening the wording here.

Reviewer 2: This is a load-bearing TODO because I don't know how to implement this from what's given. Why are those cases unimportant while the above cases are important (what about the type's usage actually matters)? The kinds of examples I'm wondering about are things like:
```
void func(const std::vector<MarkedType> &whatever); // Is this a bad use of the type?

template <typename Ty>
void func() {} // Ty isn't in the return type or parameter list but is in the signature, is a marked type bad?

template <typename Ty>
void func() noexcept(noexcept(Ty{})); // Is this a bad use of the type?

template <typename Ty>
struct S {
  void foo() {} // Does this "use" the marked type (it shows up in the signature)?
};

template <typename T>
struct S {
  explicit(std::is_same_v<T, Whatever>) S(const S&) = default; // How about this use?
};
```

Author: I'm going to use this comment thread to address all the questions about what it means to "use" a type that is marked with `[[sycl::requires]]` (or `[[__sycl::requires_type()]]`).

What I really want, of course, is to consider a type "used" only if the compiler ends up generating SPIR-V code that operates on an object of that type.  However, I need to map this back to some wording that makes sense to the C++ front end.  Here is an attempt at more precise wording, but comments are appreciated:

We consider that a device function "uses" a marked type `T` if it does any of the following:

* Defines an object (including a temporary object) of type `U`.
* Calls a "new expression" of type `U`.
* Throws an expression of type `U`.

where type `U` is any of the following:

* The type `T`.
* A cv-qualified version of type `T`.
* An array of, pointer to, or reference to type `T`.
* A type that derives from type `T`.
* A class type that contains a member object of type `T`.
* Any type that applies these rules recursively to type `T` (e.g. array of pointers to type `T`, etc.)

I'm open to using some different criteria too, if you think this is difficult for the FE to check.

**TODO**: Would it be better to use a different attribute name when decorating
types, rather than expanding the meaning of `[[sycl::requires()]]`?  If we did
this, the new attribute would become an internal DPC++ implementation detail;
we would not add it to the SYCL specification.

### Implementing diagnostics in the DPC++ front-end

As noted above, the front-end device compiler must behave as though there is an
implicit `[[sycl::requires(has(aspect::fp64))]]` attribute on any use of the

> `double` type in device code.

Reviewer 2: Presumably there's something we should do about `long double` here?

Author: Actually, `long double` is not an **optional** device feature.  The SYCL spec lists all of the [allowed fundamental types](https://www.khronos.org/registry/SYCL/specs/sycl-2020/html/sycl-2020.html#subsec:scalartypes) in device code, and this does not include `long double`.  Thus, `long double` is one of the C++ features that is disallowed in device code.  Ideally, some part of the DPC++ compiler would emit an error message whenever device code uses one of these disallowed features.  (Maybe we do this already?)  However, that is not the topic of this design document.

Reviewer 6: We should disallow long double.  as @gmlueck says, not an allowed fundamental type.  As an aside, we would even like to discourage the use of that type in host code, and have people use __float128 instead.

Reviewer 2: Oh, it turns out we do disallow it... sort of. :-(
```
template <typename Ty, typename Uy>
__attribute__((sycl_kernel)) void foo(long double this_one_is_fine) { // ok
  long double but_this_one_is_bad; // error
}
```
So it looks like there's some work left to be done on that checking. Regardless, agreed that's not the point of the design doc, so we can Resolve this comment. Thanks for the explanation!

Aside from this, the front-end compiler can implement the required diagnostics
purely from the C++ attributes that have been added to the DPC++ headers.
There is no need for the front-end compiler to know which device features are
optional.

When the front-end compiler sees a kernel or device function that is decorated
with `[[sycl::requires()]]`, it forms the set of allowed aspects for that
kernel or device function using aspects listed in the attribute.  Let's call
this the `Allowed` set.  The front-end then computes the static call tree of

> that kernel or device function and forms the union of all aspects in any

Reviewer 2: The FE generally does not form call trees (static or otherwise) -- it processes the attribute at the declaration or statement as it is seen and diagnoses what's there. This makes me worry we're designing another feature that expects heroics from the FE rather than making use of the analyzer or analysis passes.

(Note, we already have had to implement some of those heroics for other things like making sure you don't call undefined functions unless they're marked `SYCL_EXTERNAL`. That's not permission to add more instances of the same, though -- my hope is to eventually see those torn out of the FE, likely when we go to upstream to community, specifically because they're implemented in the wrong part of the compiler.)

Author: I'm marking this conversation resolved because I copied the comment to another thread and responded to it there.

issues a diagnostic.

In order to be user-friendly, the diagnostic should point the user to the
location of the problem.  Therefore, the diagnostic message should include the
following information:

* The source position of the `[[sycl::requires()]]` attribute that decorates
  the kernel or device function which provides the `Allowed` aspect set.  This
  tells the user which aspects the kernel or device function intends to use.

* The source position of the call to a function that is decorated with
  `[[sycl::requires()]]` or the source position of the use of a type that is
  decorated with `[[sycl::requires()]]`.  This tells the user where in the
  kernel a particular aspect is actually used.

Note that this analysis can be done in the front-end compiler even when a
kernel makes a call to a function that is in another translation unit.
Language rules require the application to declare such a function with
`SYCL_EXTERNAL` in the calling TU, and the `SYCL_EXTERNAL` declaration must be
decorated with the `[[sycl::requires()]]` attribute.  Therefore, the front-end
can diagnose errors with aspect usage even without seeing the definition of the

> `SYCL_EXTERNAL` function.

Reviewer 2: This is only a partial solution, IMO. Nothing prevents a user from just writing whatever attributes shut the compiler up, regardless of what's in the other TU. While that's undoubtedly UB, it's also UB that's likely to "work" just enough to catch users out. Also, a bigger issue is the ergonomics of requiring cross-TU collusion like that -- it's easy to update one place in the code and forget the others.

IMO, a better approach to this is to use a static analysis check with cross-TU support.

Author: I think there are two concerns here:

1. You are concerned that the compiler cannot adequately diagnose problems with `[[sycl::requires()]]` when attached to `SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions without doing inter-TU analysis.

2. You are concerned that the FE should not be required to construct a static call tree in order to diagnose an error, and you think this sort of analysis should be exposed via a separate analyzer tool (which could also do inter-TU analysis).

I'll start by addressing (1), but I think (2) is your larger concern.

My expectation is that application that decorate `SYCL_EXTERNAL` functions with `[[sycl::requires()]]` will place this decoration in a header file that is included by both the TU that calls the `SYCL_EXTERNAL` function and by the TU that defines the `SYCL_EXTERNAL` function.  For example, the header might look like:

```
[[sycl::requires(has(aspect::fp16))]]
SYCL_EXTERNAL void do_16bit_thing();
```

When the header is included by the TU that defines `do_16bit_thing()`, the compiler will check that the function does not use any other features other than `aspect::fp16`.  When the header is included by the TU that calls `do_16bit_thing()`, the compiler assumes that the function uses `aspect::fp16` without doing any checks.  Therefore, usage like this is safe even though the compiler does not do any inter-TU analysis.

Of course, the developer can shoot themselves in the foot by declaring the function directly in the "*.cpp" file without using a shared header.  In such a case, there is no guarantee that the `SYCL_EXTERNAL` declaration matches the definition.  I don't think we need to be overly concerned, though, about code like this that goes out of its way to shoot itself in the foot.

I think your larger concern is (2), that the clang community will not be happy about adding diagnostics in the FE that require construction of a static call tree.  Obviously, we don't want to make changes which cannot be upstreamed.  My main concern about moving this diagnostic to a separate analysis tool is that customers may not run that tool often.  As a result, I fear that incorrect programs will often go undiagnosed.

It seems to me, though, that we must currently build a static call tree for each kernel in the device compiler.  I believe the device compiler identifies all the device code by building the static call tree of each kernel (and each `SYCL_EXTERNAL` function) and then embedding the LLVM IR for the device code in the fat binary.

Therefore, it may be more appropriate to add this diagnostic message to the device compiler pass.  If that pass builds the static call tree anyways, it should be straightforward to add support for this diagnostic.

I need to understand how the device compiler builds the static call tree today.  Is that done in the compiler front-end, so I should ask you @AaronBallman, or is it done later in the compiler and I should ask someone else?

Reviewer 2: > My main concern about moving this diagnostic to a separate analysis tool is that customers may not run that tool often. As a result, I fear that incorrect programs will often go undiagnosed.

I just want to make sure we're all on the same page because I've heard this concern raised before and it raises red flags for me. There's no separate tool involved, this is all "just clang". Clang has lexing/parsing/semantic/codegen diagnostics that are emitted by the frontend -- those are your typical diagnostics, like: https://godbolt.org/z/rzYocYfqs. It also has diagnostics that are emitted by analysis passes -- those are ones that require control flow analysis but typically don't require interprocedural analysis. You have to manually enable these diagnostics because they slow down compilation somewhat, but you enable them with warning flags, like: https://godbolt.org/z/j864rzzo5. It also has diagnostics that are emitted by static analysis passes -- those are ones that require more complicated data and flow control analysis, including interprocedural analysis. You have to manually enable these as well, and there are separate tools (scan-build, CodeChecker, etc) that makes it easier to enable these as part of the build process, but it's not required, like: https://godbolt.org/z/5deM15YsT. But in all of the cases, it's "just clang" doing the lifting. There's also clang-tidy, which is run either through the static analyzer or through a separate executable, and it does AST pattern matching-based checking. My suggestion is that we should be implementing more of this logic as [static] analysis passes because that's more where this sort of functionality is expected to live in the toolchain, though I don't think we should discount clang-tidy (*especially* for lint-like functionality).

My viewpoint is that the SYCL language spec should not require anything other than statically known information (roughly: information that's carried by the AST node(s) involved in the construct without any flow analysis) to generate diagnostics for code that renders the program ill-formed (e.g, errors). This is the strategy taken by the C and C++ language designers as well and it makes for a more reasonable implementation burden for language features. For other situations where we really wish we could make it an error but can't because it requires further analysis (control or data flow or cross translation unit), the standard makes those cases "ill-formed, no diagnostic required" so that implementations don't have to go to heroics to diagnose. Alternatively, they make them undefined behavior so that implementations can do whatever they want (define the behavior, diagnose the code if they want to, don't diagnose the code if they don't want to, etc). While it'd be great to diagnose all of these IFNDR or UB situations, the expectation should be that implementations *won't* diagnose in those situations until there's a clear need to go to those efforts (and even then, the implementation may not go to those lengths). I think some of the current error situations should likely be IFNDR rather than requiring a diagnostic, and then we can make them into warnings (that are potentially upgraded to an error by default) in the appropriate analysis pass.

For warnings, I don't know that the fear is anything we can do something about because users control those. Nothing prevents a user from disabling all warning output with `-Wno-everything`, as an example. But my expectation would be that we'd want something like `-Wsycl` as a warning flag that would enable all of the SYCL-related warnings, including the analysis ones (but not the static analysis ones). If we have things that require cross-TU analysis, rely on taint analysis, etc, we may still have to push them down into the static analyzer and live with the fact that not everyone will run that tool.

> It seems to me, though, that we must currently build a static call tree for each kernel in the device compiler. I believe the device compiler identifies all the device code by building the static call tree of each kernel (and each SYCL_EXTERNAL function) and then embedding the LLVM IR for the device code in the fat binary.

Yes, that currently happens in the FE and is what I'm pushing back of adding more diagnostic logic to. IMO, it's not sustainable for diagnostics even if it’s needed for codegen purposes. The fact that some of this is used for *errors* is especially concerning because it makes error logic mysterious (if the call graph gets constructed one way, you get the error, but if you perturb the code sufficiently, the error goes dormant while still remaining in the user's source code).

Author: OK, how about this as a high level design strategy:

* The FE will just be responsible for decorating the LLVM IR with [IR function attributes](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#function-attributes) which capture the information about the `[[sycl::requires()]]` C++ attributes and information about the "used" aspects.  (I know that I have not defined "used" well yet.  I still plan to respond to that comment.)  There is another comment thread in this PR where we discuss using IR function attributes to convey information to the post-link tool.

* The FE will not be required to raise diagnostics when a device function uses an optional feature that is not listed in a `[[sycl::requires()]]` attribute.  Instead, these diagnostics will be added to either the clang analysis pass or the clang static analysis pass as you suggest above.  Since these passes aren't enabled by default, users won't get these diagnostic checks unless they specifically ask for them.

* The post-link tool also needs to build each kernel's static call tree, so we can add diagnostic checks there.  If an error is found, the diagnostic message will probably not contain the source position of the offending code.  Instead, it will just contain the name of the offending function.  However, the diagnostic message can tell the user how to enable the checking in the analysis pass, which will provide a better error message.

I think this achieves your goal of not wanting to perform heroic diagnostic checking in the FE, while also achieving my goal of wanting to inform users when their code uses optional features incorrectly.

Reviewer 2: I think this sounds like a good path forward, but I want to make sure I'm clear on one point: 

> Instead, these diagnostics will be added to either the clang analysis pass or the clang static analysis pass as you suggest above.

Are these diagnostics warnings or errors? If they're warnings, then I think this'll work well. If they're errors, then we're drifting somewhat into novel territory of having a flag to enable errors. If you really need them to be errors, one possible compromise approach would be to treat them as warnings that default to an error. They can still be manually disabled to ignore the error, but they're pretty error-like in the common case. e.g., https://godbolt.org/z/xM6zrsE17

Author: The SYCL spec doesn't distinguish between errors and warnings; it just says that a "diagnostic" is required.  I think a good analogy would be the C++ `[[noreturn]]` attribute.  What does clang do if a function is decorated with this attribute, and the compiler can detect that the function does return?  Is this an error or a warning?

I think the behavior of `[[sycl::requires()]]` should be similar.  Like `[[noreturn]]`, this is also an assertion by the programmer that a function has a certain characteristic.

Reviewer 2: > The SYCL spec doesn't distinguish between errors and warnings; it just says that a "diagnostic" is required. 

This is a bit of an aside that's beyond your proposal here, but that seems like something you may want to address in the SYCL spec. In C++, programs are either ill-formed or well-formed. If the program is well-formed, then an implementation must translate the program. The same is not true if the program is ill-formed. The basic idea is that when a program is ill-formed, the user will get an error message and otherwise the standard doesn't *require* any diagnostics whatsoever, but it might *recommended* a warning in some circumstances.

I'd imagine SYCL wants a similar distinction, otherwise a conforming (low-quality) implementation can write "Congratulations, you've used SYCL" as a "diagnostic message" and that covers all semantic checking requirements for the SYCL spec. Having some delineation makes it clear to implementers what the expectations are.

> I think a good analogy would be the C++ [[noreturn]] attribute. What does clang do if a function is decorated with this attribute, and the compiler can detect that the function does return? Is this an error or a warning?

That's recommended to be a warning (http://eel.is/c++draft/dcl.attr.noreturn#3).

> I think the behavior of [[sycl::requires()]] should be similar. Like [[noreturn]], this is also an assertion by the programmer that a function has a certain characteristic.

Okay, I think that's a good answer here because it means we can implement this as a warning in whatever part of the compiler makes the most sense, which could include not warning the user at all in circumstances that are too hard to identify.

The idea is to emit a SPIR-V specialization constant for each aspect that is
required by a kernel or device function in the device image.  We then introduce
a new SPIR-V "decoration" that tells the JIT compiler to discard a function if
a specialization constant is `False`.  The DPC++ runtime will set the values of
the specialization constants according to the target device, thus the JIT
compiler discards (and does not compile) any kernels or device functions that
use features which are not supported on that device.  This avoids errors due to
speculative compilation of kernels or device functions.

#### Representation in SPIR-V

To illustrate how kernels using optional features are represented in SPIR-V,
consider a kernel `K` that requires aspects `A1` and `A2`.  The SPIR-V module
will contain three boolean specialization constants: one representing `A1`, one
representing `A2`, and one representing the expression `A1 && A2`.  All of
these can be represented without any extension to SPIR-V.

```
OpDecorate %11 SpecId 1                       ; External ID for spec const A1
OpDecorate %12 SpecId 2                       ; External ID for spec const A2

> %10 = OpTypeBool

Author: The SPIR-V spec already defines the order for these instructions.  All "OpDecorate", "OpTypeXXX", and "OpSpecConstantXXX" instructions appear early in the SPIR-V module before the definition of any function.

See [Logical Layout of a Module](https://www.khronos.org/registry/spir-v/specs/unified1/SPIRV.html#_a_id_logicallayout_a_logical_layout_of_a_module) in the SPIR-V specification.

constant representing `A1 && A2`.  The semantic of this decoration is that the
JIT compiler must discard the function unless the value of the specialization
constant is `True`.  Augmenting the example from above:

```
OpDecorate %11 SpecId 1                       ; External ID for spec const A1
OpDecorate %12 SpecId 2                       ; External ID for spec const A2
OpDecorate %16 ConditionalINTEL %13           ; Says to discard the function
                                              ; below when (A1 && A2) is False
%10 = OpTypeBool
%11 = OpSpecConstantTrue %10                  ; Represents A1
%12 = OpSpecConstantTrue %10                  ; Represents A2
%13 = OpSpecConstantOp %10 LogicalAnd %11 %12 ; Represents A1 && A2
%14 = OpTypeVoid
%15 = OpTypeFunction %14

%16 = OpFunction %14 None %15                 ; Definition of function that is
...                                           ; discarded when (A1 && A2) is False
OpFunctionEnd
```

See the extension specification of [SpecConditional][6] for a full
description of this new SPIR-V decoration.

[6]: <extensions/SPIRV/SPV_INTEL_spec_conditional.asciidoc>

#### Representation in LLVM IR

> **TODO**: I need some help here on how to represent the `[[sycl::requires()]]`

Author: I think you are saying that approach (2) is used to represent OpenCL C++ attributes (e.g. `reqd_work_group_size`) in LLVM IR.  Is it safe to assume that we use this approach to represent the SYCL C++ attribute also?  If so, it seems like it would be sensible to use that approach for the new `[[sycl::requires()]]` attribute too.

For example, I think we could represent this:

```
[[sycl::requires(has(A1, A2))]]
void foo() { /* ... */ }
```

as:

```
define void foo() !sycl.required_aspects !1 {
  ret void
}

!1 = !{i32 A1, i32 A2}  ; A1 and A2 are just the integer values of the aspects from "enum class aspect"
```

> The possible downside here is that historically, metadata was introduced to store debug info and AFAIK it could be easily dropped/lost during various optimizations/transformations.

It seems like this must not be a concern if the OpenCL / SYCL C++ attributes are represented this way.  Some of those attributes are required for correctness, so dropping them would cause problems.  In addition, the examples in the [lang ref](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#function-attributes) like `alignstack(n)` seem to be required for correctness, so I presume they are also not dropped.

> **TODO**: I need some help here on how to represent the `[[sycl::requires()]]`

Reviewer 5: > Is it safe to assume that we use this approach to represent the SYCL C++ attribute also?

It might be different for each attributes, but ones which exist in OpenCL are represented in the same way.

> **TODO**: I need some help here on how to represent the `[[sycl::requires()]]`

Author: Thanks for all the input.  The latest version of the spec uses metadata to represent the attributes in LLVM IR.

attributes in LLVM IR.  I suspect there is already some mechanism for
representing SYCL attributes in LLVM IR, so hopefully we can mostly reuse that
mechanism.

#### Modifications to the post-link tool

The post-link tool must be modified to add the SPIR-V `ConditionalINTEL`
decorations to the appropriate functions and to emit the specialization
constants that these decorations reference.  This can be done with two passes

> over the static call tree for each kernel and each exported device function.

Author: This issue no longer exists because we decided to use the alternate design that does not extend SPIR-V.

**NOTE**: In this context, "exported device function" means a device function
that is exported from a shared library as defined by [Device Code Dynamic
Linking][7].

[7]: <https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/3210>

The first pass operates on each kernel and each exported device function,
iterating over all the functions in the static call tree of that kernel or
exported device function to form the union of all aspects it requires.  If the
kernel or exported device function is decorated with the
`[[sycl::requires()]]`, those aspects are also added to the union.

**NOTE**: This first pass traverses the static call tree even for kernels that
are decorated with the `[[sycl::requires()]]` attribute.  Although the
front-end compiler has already verified that the kernel doesn't require any
aspects beyond those listed in the attribute, the front-end compiler was only
able to verify this for the device functions that reside in the same
translation unit as the kernel.  Therefore, we might still find more required
aspects in the post-link tool because we have visibility to all device
functions in the kernel's static call tree, even those that are defined in

> other translation units.

Author: Yes, this is a good point.  I think we can emit an error instead.

> other translation units.

Reviewer 5: To optimize the implementation a bit, we could complete avoid those extra call graph traversals and just say that such situation is a UB

> other translation units.

Author: We need to write the code to do the graph traversal anyways because it is needed for the kernels that do not have the `[[sycl::requires()]]` attribute.  I expect that most of the kernels will not have that attribute, so skipping the graph traversal just for the ones that have the attribute will not save that much time.  It seems like it would be worth the extra traversal time in these cases in order to get the better error checking.

> other translation units.

Author: I added wording in 2b51cf572fb0b92f7257968dcdad589639ab7bfb to say that the post-link tool raises a diagnostic if the cross-TU static call tree uses any aspects that are not listed in the `[[sycl::requires()]]` attribute.

Once we have the full set of aspects used by each kernel and exported device
function, we do the following for each:

* For each required aspects, emit an `OpSpecConstantTrue` instruction to
  represent this requirement.  We maintain a set of "required specialization
  constants" for each kernel or exported device function, which is used later.
  Add this specialization constant to that set.  In addition, add an "aspect"
  entry to the device image's "SYCL/requirements" property set, as described

>   below.  (We could instead emit `OpSpecConstantFalse`.  It doesn't matter

Author: Resolving this since we decided to go with the alternate design that does not rely on extending SPIR-V.

information, we do the following for each function `F` that has a non-empty set
of required specialization constants:

* Emit a series of `OpSpecConstantOp` ops with the `OpLogicalAnd` and
  `OpLogicalOr` opcodes to compute the expression `P1 || P2 || ...` described
  above.

* Emit a `ConditionalINTEL` decoration for the function, referencing this
  computed specialization constant.

In all cases above, we should keep track of the specialization constants that
are emitted and reuse them when possible, rather than emitting duplicates.

#### New device image property set

A new device image property set is needed to inform the DPC++ runtime of the
aspects that each kernel or exported device function requires and the
work-group or sub-group sizes that each kernel requires.  This property set is
named "SYCL/requirements".  The name of each property in the set is the name of
a kernel or the name of an exported device function in the device image.  The
value of each property has the following form:

```
[entry_count (uint32)]
[entry_type (uint32)] <variable parameters>
[entry_type (uint32)] <variable parameters>
...
[entry_type (uint32)] <variable parameters>

> ```

Author: I think my intention is the same as what you suggest, but I didn't use the terminology correctly, so my description was confusing.  What I propose is as follows:

* Add a new property set named "SYCL/requirements".
* The name of each property in that set is either the name of a kernel function in the device image or the name of an exported device function in the device image.
* The value of each property has `BYTE_ARRAY` type.
* The format of the byte array is what I describe above in this section (first word is `entry_count`, followed by an array of variable-sized entries).

If that sounds OK, I'll reword this section to make it more clear.

> ```

Reviewer 5: I think that existing section is pretty fine, we just need to extend it to describe that our high-level structure is not supported by properties as-is and it is being lowered to supported `BYTE_ARRAY` in a particular way.

> ```

Author: I clarified this in f67816befcf8bdb4afc68e26cedc68759eedbf16.

compilation, it must do the following additional steps:

* Compute the union of all requirements from all entries in the image's
  "SYCL/requirements" property set.

* Query the target device to see whether it supports each of these
  requirements, yielding either `True` or `False` for each one.

* Set the value of each associated specialization constant when JIT compiling
  the device image for this target device.

Note that the runtime's cache of compiled device images does not need any
special modification because the cache already needs to know the values of all
the specialization constants that were used to compile the device image.  We
just need to make sure the cache is also aware of the specialization constants
which correspond to the requirements from the "SYCL/requirements" property set.

#### Modifications to the GEN compiler

The GEN compiler, of course, needs to be modified to implement the new
`ConditionalINTEL` SPIR-V decoration.  It must discard any function with this
decoration (unless the corresponding specialization constant is `True`), and it
must not raise any sort of error due to compilation of these discarded

> functions.

Reviewer 5: Note: SPIR-V specialization step is performed by the SPIR-V translator and therefore shared between all the backends using it:

https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/611746cb9b4d099b55a42a5043aa3114ceacec30/llvm-spirv/tools/llvm-spirv/llvm-spirv.cpp#L157-L165

This section could probably be omitted in favor of saying that functions are discarded during [Specialization](https://www.khronos.org/registry/spir-v/specs/unified1/SPIRV.html#_a_id_specializationsection_a_specialization) step in the corresponding SPIR-V extension step

Reviewer 5: > I presume the SPIRV->LLVM translator is incorporated into the OpenCL and Level Zero drivers, right?

That is an implementation detail. I think the best way here would be to say that we _require_ backends to support `SPV_INTEL_spec_conditional`. This automatically will imply discarding "disabled" functions and integration of the corresponding SPIR-V translator patch (in some or another way).

BTW, do we really *require* this extension now for a pretty simple SYCL applications which can be otherwise represented using core SPIR-V functionality?

Author: > BTW, do we really require this extension now for even the simplest SYCL applications which can be otherwise represented using core SPIR-V functionality?

I think we should not say that the driver is required to implement all of `SPV_INTEL_spec_conditional` since many of those features are intended to support the [device-if](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/DeviceIf/device_if.asciidoc) feature.  Instead, we could say that the driver is required to support only the `ConditionalINTEL` decoration from `SPV_INTEL_spec_conditional`.

Reviewer 5: > Instead, we could say that the driver is required to support only the ConditionalINTEL decoration from SPV_INTEL_spec_conditional.

Still, this reduces portability: in order to add your backend you will have to support some non-standard `INTEL` extension, not even `KHR`-one. BTW, what about non-SPIR-V backends? How conditional compilation intended to work there?

Author: > Still, this reduces portability: in order to add your backend you will have to support some non-standard INTEL extension, not even KHR-one. BTW, what about non-SPIR-V backends? How conditional compilation intended to work there?

There is a big design decision to make here:

1. We can bundle all kernels together into device images as we normally do, but decorate the SPIR-V in a way that allows some functions to be discarded at JIT compilation time.  This is the strategy I describe now in this design document.  Or,

2. We can change the bundling strategy in the post-link tool so that kernels are only bundled together into the same device image if they use exactly the same set of device aspects.  This is an alternate design that I allude to in the paragraph that starts "There are two ways to solve this problem ...".

Initially, I thought (2) was the best approach because it didn't require any SPIR-V extensions.  But, then I realized that we would need the SPIR-V extension anyways in order to implement the [device-if](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/DeviceIf/device_if.asciidoc) feature.

You are correct that option (2) would be easier to port to different backends because it doesn't require any SPIR-V extension.  It would also be more straightforward to port to backends that don't use SPIR-V.  I think the main disadvantage to (2) is that it's extra work, especially if we plan to implement [device-if](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/DeviceIf/device_if.asciidoc).  Assuming that we do implement device-if using the SPIR-V extension, it's relatively easy to use that same extension to implement option (1).

Answering your question about non-SPIR-V backends, we would have to take this on a case-by-case basis.  If the backend supported some sort of way to conditionally compile code at JIT time, we could use that feature.  If it did not, we could always implement option (2) just for that backend (and for any similar backends).

I know from previous discussions that @kbobrovs prefers option (1), and I think @kbsmith-intel has expressed a preference for that also.  We did not specifically discuss the flexibility to support non-SPIR-V backends, though.  I think we need to decide if the extra effort required for option (2) is worth the extra flexibility it provides.

Author: We had an offline meeting and decided to go with design option (2).  This design document has already been updated to reflect that choice.

### AOT case

The AOT case uses exactly the same solution as the JIT case described above,
but there is one extra steps.  For the AOT case, the post-link tool must set
the values of the specialization constants that correspond to the requirements
for the kernel or exported device function, using the device named in the
"-fsycl-targets" command line option.  After doing this, the post-link tool
calls the AOT compiler to generate native code from SPIR-V as it normally does.
If more than one target device is specified, the post-link tool sets the
specialization constants separately for each device before generating native

> code for that device.

Reviewer 5: A lot of questions here:

`-fsycl-targets` at the moment only contains triple and it can't properly point us to a particular device. For example different HW generations could have different HW capabilities and therefore different list of supported aspects, but triple is the same. For GPU we select a device by passing extra arguments to the backend, i.e. we invoke `ocloc` with `-device [device-name]` option.

`sycl-post-link` does not call `ocloc` - this is a driver responsibility.

`sycl-post-link` does not set values of specialization constants - the only existing interface is through calling corresponding L0/OpenCL API or generating SPIR-V with a proper default value from the beginning.

This is related to my concern about AOT in one of my comments above: another idea here would be driver to launch AOT compiler _before_ invoking `sycl-post-link` to gather device capabilities in some predefined machine-readable format and then pass this info into `sycl-post-link` so it can generate correct defaults for spec constants in the resulting SPIR-V file.

Author: Thanks, this helps a lot with my understanding of the AOT flow.

> another idea here would be driver to launch AOT compiler before invoking sycl-post-link to gather device capabilities in some predefined machine-readable format and then pass this info into sycl-post-link so it can generate correct defaults for spec constants in the resulting SPIR-V file.

This does not seem ideal because we would need to run sycl-post-link multiple times in the case when we AOT compile for more than one device.  (Because we would need to set different default values for the spec constants depending on the device.)

Instead, what do you think about this design:

* It seems like `ocloc` does not currently have a command line option that can be used to set the value of a specialization constant when compiling a SPIR-V module.  This seems like functionality that would be generally useful, so let's add such an option.  Usage would be like `-spec_const <id>=<value>`, where `<id>` is the numeric SpecID identifier for a SPIR-V specialization constant and `<value>` is the requested value.  Ideally, we'd support Boolean, integer, and floating point values, but for this design we need only Boolean.

* We need some way for the `sycl-post-link` tool to pass information back to the driver about the specialization constants in the SPIR-V module(s).  We choose one of the following depending on what's easier:
  - The `sycl-post-link` tool already generates this information in the "SYCL/requirements" property set.  Is the content of this property set already sent back to the driver for packaging with `clang-offload-wrapper`?  If so, the driver can just read the content of this property set directly.
  - Alternatively, `sycl-post-link` can generate a meta-data file in some format that is convenient for the driver, and the driver can read the information from this meta-data file.

* You say that the driver already passes `-device [device-name]` options to `ocloc`, so it must somehow be able to tell which device(s) we are compiling for.  Therefore, the driver can also be responsible for determine whether each `aspect` is true or false for each device.  The runtime also needs to know this information, so we will store the information in some common file in the source tree, which is shared by both the driver and the runtime.

* The driver uses information from the meta-data file (from `sycl-post-link`) to learn which spec constants are contained by the SPIR-V module and also uses this information to learn the associated `aspect`.  The driver then passes options to `ocloc` to set the spec constant `True` / `False` as appropriate for that device.

Reviewer 5: The scheme you have suggested looks similar to what I was talking about here: https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/3781#discussion_r639199999.

A few notes:

> We need some way for the sycl-post-link tool to pass information back to the driver about the specialization constants in the SPIR-V module(s). We choose one of the following depending on what's easier:

AFAIK, driver works in the following manner: it fully builds a sequence of commands to execute and only then launches them. Commands can't be conditional and we can't change the list during its execution. @mdtoguchi and @AGindinson can provide more details here. Instead, we should be talking about propagating some info from one tool to another through input/output files of those tools. The phrase "pass information back to the driver" should be "generate a file, which is later passed to AOT compiler" or something like this, per my understanding.

> The `sycl-post-link` tool already generates this information in the "SYCL/requirements" property set. Is the content of this property set already sent back to the driver for packaging with clang-offload-wrapper? If so, the driver can just read the content of this property set directly.

Info is stored in a file, driver just ensures that the file is passed to `clang-offload-wrapper` without reading its content.

> You say that the driver already passes -device [device-name] options to ocloc, so it must somehow be able to tell which device(s) we are compiling for. 

I would like @mdtoguchi and/or @AGindinson to comment here, but my current understanding is that we don't have a generic scheme for selecting HW generation/type, related feature requests are #1382 and #1170. The problem is that currently we select device by specifying target backend options, which are unique for each backend and from the driver point of view it is an arbitrary string which is just passed as-is to the tool: it is not analyzed/inspected in any way by the driver.

> Therefore, the driver can also be responsible for determine whether each aspect is true or false for each device. 

How exactly do you suggest to implement this? Will it be hardcoded for each device or will it be queried through runtime call or a separate tool?

> The driver then passes options to ocloc to set the spec constant True / False as appropriate for that device.

Since the list of commands and their arguments must be known prior to their execution, the interface here would likely be a config file or something like this.

Author: >> The sycl-post-link tool already generates this information in the "SYCL/requirements" property set. Is the content of this property set already sent back to the driver for packaging with clang-offload-wrapper? If so, the driver can just read the content of this property set directly.
>
> Info is stored in a file, driver just ensures that the file is passed to clang-offload-wrapper without reading its content.
>
> [...]
>
> Since the list of commands and their arguments must be known prior to their execution, the interface here would likely be a config file or something like this.

If we do not want to change the driver to read the file (containing the device image property sets), maybe we could do something like this instead:

* Create a new tool that is invoked by the driver that generates a config file for `ocloc`.
* Driver invokes this new tool, passing the file that contains the device image property sets.
* The new tool uses that information to generate the config file, including the `-spec_const <id>=<value>` parameters I describe above.
* Driver invokes the `ocloc` tool with this generated config file.

> How exactly do you suggest to implement this? Will it be hardcoded for each device or will it be queried through runtime call or a separate tool?

I don't think we can assume that the target device is present on the compilation system, so I don't think we can query the device at compilation time.  I was thinking that we would have a hard-coded table mapping each device to its set of aspects.  This information could also be used by the DPC++ runtime to implement `device::has(aspect)`.

Reviewer 5: > > How exactly do you suggest to implement this? Will it be hardcoded for each device or will it be queried through runtime call or a separate tool?
>
> I don't think we can assume that the target device is present on the compilation system, so I don't think we can query the device at compilation time. I was thinking that we would have a hard-coded table mapping each device to its set of aspects. This information could also be used by the DPC++ runtime to implement `device::has(aspect)`.

Personally, I don't think that hardcoding device capabilities is a good idea, because:
- There are features, which are not natively supported by a particular device, but they might be emulated by JIT compiler/driver and therefore their support depends not on the HW, but on the driver version
- Older compiler won't know about newer devices and therefore the result might be unexpected - this might not be so important for end users, but every time we enable new device, it will require extra work to get some basic (i.e. native to the new device) features working

Author: Keep in mind that we are only using the hard-coded device information when we AOT-compile the device code.  This essentially runs the JIT compiler at AOT compilation time.

Are you suggesting that the AOT compiler should dynamically query `ocloc` to find the set of device features it supports?  I suppose this would avoid duplicating some information in both the AOT compiler and in the driver.  The downside is that it adds some more complexity to the design and adds another component that needs to be modified.

Author: We had an offline meeting to discuss this (and other things).  We decided to hard-code the set of aspects that each device supports in a textual config file, and we will provide a way for the user to choose an alternate version of this config file.  This design document has already been updated to include this information.

> Note that the native device image may not contain all kernels or all exported

Reviewer 5: This is an important note which should be also somehow highlighted in `sycl-post-link` section, because it basically means do requirements collection before device code split and use gathered list of requirements for each resulting device image. I definitely missed this details while was reading about `sycl-post-link` changes.

Author: I think you may misunderstand what I'm saying, but I'm not sure.  I was thinking that `sycl-post-link` will gather the requirements **for each kernel** before device code split, but it doesn't really matter since the information is per-kernel.  Of course, `sycl-post-link` will need to construct the contents of the "SYCL/requirements" property set after device code split, since the property set is per-device image, and we don't know the kernels in each device image until after device code split.  I'll try to make this clearer in the document.

The thing I'm pointing out here is specific to the AOT case, where we run the SPIRV->native compiler at AOT time.  When this happens, the native device image may not contain all the kernels that were in the SPIR-V image because some of them may have been discarded due to the `ConditionalINTEL` SPIR-V decoration.

Author: I think this issue is resolved now, but please feel free to commend (and unresolve this thread) if you still have concerns.

describe the set of optional features that a kernel uses (with the exception
of the required work-group or sub-group size).

As we will see later, it is helpful to decorate all APIs in DPC++ headers that
correspond to optional kernel features with a C++ attribute that identifies the
associated aspect.  We cannot use the `[[sycl::requires()]]` attribute for this
purpose, though, because that attribute is allowed only for functions.
Instead, we invent a new internal attribute `[[sycl_detail::uses_aspects()]]`
that can be used to decorate both functions and types.  This attribute is not
documented for user code; instead it is an internal implementation detail of
DPC++.

Like all use of C++ attributes in the DPC++ headers, the headers should spell
the attribute using initial and trailing double underscores
(`[[__sycl_detail__::__uses_aspects__()]]`).  We show that form in the code
samples below, but this design document uses the form without the underbars
elsewhere.  Both forms refer to the same attribute.

To illustrate, the type `sycl::half` is an optional feature whose associated
aspect is `aspect::fp16`.  We therefore decorate the declaration like this:

```

> using half [[__sycl_detail__::__uses_aspects__(has(aspect::fp16))]] =

Author: I did this mostly to reuse the syntax that we need already for the `[[sycl::requires()]]` attribute.  I figured it would be easier for the front-end to implement if we use the same parameter syntax for both attributes.  If that is not the case, then I agree that we could simplify the parameter syntax for `[[sycl_detail::uses_aspects()]]`.  It would probably be wise, though, to at least allow a list of aspects, because I could foresee the possibility that some optional features might require a device with more than one aspect.

Since you will probably ask ... the reason the `[[sycl::requires()]]` attribute has the `has()` clause is because we think we may want to extend this in the future to allow boolean expressions of required aspects.  For example, we could imagine a syntax like `[[sycl::requires(has(aspect::foo) || has(aspect::bar))]]`.  We think this syntax might be useful once we add the [device-if](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/DeviceIf/device_if.asciidoc) feature.  However, I do not foresee a need for such complicated expressions for `[[sycl_detail::uses_aspects()]]`.

> using half [[__sycl_detail__::__uses_aspects__(has(aspect::fp16))]] =

Author: We talked about the syntax for this attribute in our meeting yesterday, and we are considering simplifying the parameter list.  @AaronBallman: can we assume that the simplified syntax I describe below would be easier for the FE to deal with?

Some brief motivation ... I don't like the fact that the common use case of `sycl::requires()` needs the `has()` clause.  Even if we do allow disjunctions in the future, they will be extremely uncommon.  Therefore, I'd like the common case to have simpler syntax like `sycl::requires(aspect1, aspects2)`.  If we are changing this part of the spec anyways, we'd also like to rename the attribute to avoid confusion with the C++20 "requires" keyword.

Therefore, we are thinking of changing the `[[sycl::requires()]]` attribute to be like: `[[sycl::device_has(aspect, aspect, ...)]]`.  For example:

```
[[sycl::device_has(aspect::fp64, aspect::atomic64)]]
```

If we do this, then we would also change the internal attribute `[[sycl::uses_aspects()]]` to have the same parameter syntax.

> using half [[__sycl_detail__::__uses_aspects__(has(aspect::fp16))]] =

Reviewer 4: I'll leave it to @AaronBallman to comment on the new name but yes removing the `has`  clause simplifies FE implementation.

> using half [[__sycl_detail__::__uses_aspects__(has(aspect::fp16))]] =

Reviewer 2: >  @AaronBallman: can we assume that the simplified syntax I describe below would be easier for the FE to deal with?

Yes, this would simplify things greatly! But if you do have disjunctions, what would they look like? (Just trying to make sure we don't paint ourselves into a corner with the design.)

> If we are changing this part of the spec anyways, we'd also like to rename the attribute to avoid confusion with the C++20 "requires" keyword.

Aside: this one turns out to be not super problematic because C++ requires implementations to treat keywords within an attribute list as though they were identifiers (https://eel.is/c++draft/dcl.attr#grammar-4.sentence-5).

> using half [[__sycl_detail__::__uses_aspects__(has(aspect::fp16))]] =

Author: > Aside: this one turns out to be not super problematic because C++ requires implementations to treat keywords within an attribute list as though they were identifiers

I think it still makes sense to rename the attribute for the sake of humans who will read the code.  Using a name that matches an unrelated keyword seems like it might cause confusion.

> But if you do have disjunctions, what would they look like? (Just trying to make sure we don't paint ourselves into a corner with the design.)

Here is the rationale I plan to pitch to the committee:

> Our original intent was to allow the `[[sycl::requires()]]` attribute to express both conjunctions and disjunctions of aspects in some future version of the SYCL spec.  For example, we thought we might want to allow syntax like this in the future:
>
> ```
> [[sycl::requires(has(aspect::fp64, aspect::atomic64) || has(aspect::fp16))]]
> ```
>
> We still think this might be desirable in the future, but we think disjunctions like this will be very uncommon.  We don't want to incur the complexity of the `has()` clause even in the common case, so we omit it from the current syntax (which only supports conjunctions of aspects).
>
> If we do decide to support disjunction in the future, we can create a new attribute that supports the expanded syntax. 
 For example:
>
> ```
> [[sycl::device_has_expression(has(aspect::fp64, aspect::atomic64) || has(aspect::fp16))]]
> ```
>
> (We can bikeshed the name `device_has_expression` later if we decide to add this.)

> using half [[__sycl_detail__::__uses_aspects__(has(aspect::fp16))]] =

Reviewer 2: > I think it still makes sense to rename the attribute for the sake of humans who will read the code. Using a name that matches an unrelated keyword seems like it might cause confusion.

No complaints from me on that! I just didn't want you to think you had to rename it because the keyword was an issue.

> If we do decide to support disjunction in the future, we can create a new attribute that supports the expanded syntax.
> For example:
> `[[sycl::device_has_expression(has(aspect::fp64, aspect::atomic64) || has(aspect::fp16))]]`
> (We can bikeshed the name device_has_expression later if we decide to add this.)

This would run into the same FE implementation issues I was worried about. To explain in a bit more detail: Clang (and I believe other implementations as well) implement parsing attributes in a generic way: we see `[[` in a place where we expect an attribute specifier to appear, and we parse the attribute name (like `sycl::requires`) up to the argument list. Once we know the attribute, we can decide how to parse its argument list. Currently, the *vast* majority of attribute argument lists are "simple" in that they can all be parsed generically based off information we have in a tablegen file. (The tablegen file says "you have these attributes, they expect this number of arguments of this type, etc" and the arguments are typically "a string" or "an expression" or "one of these identifiers as though it was an enumeration", etc.) A later stage takes these parsed attributes and turns them into AST nodes while checking that what was parsed is valid based on the same information in the tablegen file. These `has` clauses are a totally different thing that we basically have to write custom parsing logic to support. That custom parsing logic isn't actually the bad part of this -- we do custom parsing already in other circumstances. The bad part is taking the parsed attributes and turning them into AST nodes -- that generic "parsed attribute" interface knows about simple things like expressions, identifiers, etc. It has no notion of has clauses or predicate expressions between clauses like `||` and so we'd have to get inventive there. What's more, because the predicate expressions aren't on actual C or C++ syntax, we have to make our own expression evaluator to evaluate the logic. (e.g., `[[foo(false || 12 + i == 17)]]` is easy to evaluate assuming `i` is an integer constant expression because we can just pass the `Expr *` held by the parsed attribute to the constant expression evaluator. But `[[foo(has(false) || has(12 + i == 17))]]` is hard when `has` is part of the attribute syntax because there's no `Expr *` to evaluate.)

> using half [[__sycl_detail__::__uses_aspects__(has(aspect::fp16))]] =

Author: It might be better to debate this is detain later if / when we decide to extend the parameters to allow disjunctions.  It's possible that the extension won't even use C++ attributes since we are considering an alternate syntax based on "properties".

Still, I don't want to paint ourselves into a corner in case we decide to stick with a C++ attribute syntax.  My main concern at this point is to make sure we don't make things worse in the future by changing from `[[sycl::requires(has(asp, asp, ...))]]` to `[[sycl::device_has(asp, asp, ...)]]`.  At this point, I don't see how this change makes things harder for us in the future.

At the risk of going into too much depth now, I did want to address one concern.  Even if we do add disjunctions, we wouldn't want the CFE to do any sort of constant expression evaluation.  We would just want some straightforward transcription of the parameters into LLVM metadata, and later phases would be responsible for using the information.  Hopefully, that would avoid the need for extending the structure of AST nodes.

> using half [[__sycl_detail__::__uses_aspects__(has(aspect::fp16))]] =

Reviewer 2: > At this point, I don't see how this change makes things harder for us in the future.

It doesn't make it harder for us in the future; it's the same level of hard as today.

> Hopefully, that would avoid the need for extending the structure of AST nodes.

It wouldn't avoid that need, but we can cross that bridge when we come to it.

> using half [[__sycl_detail__::__uses_aspects__(has(aspect::fp16))]] =

Author: I submitted [PR171](https://github.com/KhronosGroup/SYCL-Docs/pull/171) against the SYCL 2020 spec to change the name of the `[[sycl::requires()]]` aspect to `[[sycl::device_has()]]` and to remove the `has()` clause.

In anticipation of that being adopted, I removed the `has()` clause from `[[sycl::uses_aspects()]]` in 1e927c107a7ac5c486a5620fba4ce80912701785.  I'll rename the `[[sycl::requires()]]` references to `[[sycl::device_has()]]` when/if [PR171](https://github.com/KhronosGroup/SYCL-Docs/pull/171) is adopted.

attribute to 8-byte `atomic_ref`"][4] for an illustration of how this attribute
can be used in conjunction with partial specialization to mark only certain
instantiations of `sycl::atomic_ref` as an optional feature.

[4]: <#appendix-adding-an-attribute-to-8-byte-atomic_ref>

As you can see from the examples above, the syntax for the parameter to the
`[[sycl_detail::uses_aspects()]]` attribute is identical to the syntax for the
standard `[[sycl::requires()]]` attribute.

Unfortunately, the fundamental type `double` is also an optional kernel
feature.  Since there is no type alias for `double`, there is no convenient
place to add an attribute.  Instead, the front-end device compiler must behave
as though there was an implicit
`[[sycl_detail::uses_aspects(has(aspect::fp64))]]` attribute for any device
code that uses the `double` type.

### New LLVM IR metadata

In order to communicate the information from `[[sycl::requires()]]` and
`[[sycl_detail::uses_aspects()]]` attributes to the DPC++ post-link tool, we
introduce two new LLVM IR metadata that can be attached to a function
definition, similar to the existing `!intel_reqd_sub_group_size`.

> These new metadata are named `!intel_allowed_aspects` and

Author: Sure, I like the name `!intel_declared_aspects`.  If there are no objections, I'll rename it to that.

> These new metadata are named `!intel_allowed_aspects` and

Author: Renamed in f64acdafdaa9f05f8287e3aa88da935bb5a20774

attributes that decorate overridden versions of the function.

As noted earlier, standard SYCL does not allow indirect function calls or
virtual functions in device code, although a DPC++ extension that adds some
limited form of indirect function call is being contemplated.  If this
extension allows virtual functions, we expect that when
`[[sycl_detail::uses_aspects()]]` decorates a virtual function, it applies only
to the static type of the class.  Therefore, when the front-end considers the
set of aspects used by a virtual function call like the following:

```
void foo(Base *b) {
  b->bar();
}
```

It considers only the `[[sycl_detail::uses_aspects()]]` attribute that may
decorate the definition of `Base::foo()` even though the application may pass a
pointer to a derived class which decorates `foo()` differently.

### Changes to other phases of clang

Any clang phases that do function inlining will need to be changed, so that the
`!intel_allowed_aspects` and `!intel_uses_aspects` metadata are transferred
from the inlined function to the function that receives the inlined function
body.  Presumably, there is already similar logic for the existing

> `!reqd_work_group_size` metadata, which already decorates device functions.

Author: I don't know about OpenCL, but this attribute was also used in SYCL 1.2.1, where it could appear on any device function (not just the kernel).  I presume that clang could inline these device function into the kernel that calls them, right?

> `!reqd_work_group_size` metadata, which already decorates device functions.

Author: I changed the design in da9d05e9a9462006e64953b476be663457b14dea such that the metadata only needs to be preserved on kernel functions and on exported device functions, both of which have external linkage.  Therefore, there is no longer any danger that the metadata will be lost due to inlining.

If you think this issue is resolved, please mark the thread as resolved.

> `!reqd_work_group_size` metadata, which already decorates device functions.

Reviewer 5: I'm still not entirely convinced that this is completely safe, but I don't have enough knowledge and/or time to obtain it, so let's leave it as-is for now - we can change the approach later if it turns out to be impractical

Once the *Used* set of aspects is known for each function, the post-link tool
compares this set of aspects with the aspects from any `!intel_allowed_aspects`
metadata.  If the function has this metadata and if the *Used* set contains
aspects not in that set, it issues a warning indicating that the function uses
aspects that are not in the `[[sycl::requires()]]` list.  Unfortunately, the
post-link tool is unable to include the source position of the code that uses
the aspect in question.  To compensate, the warning message must include
instructions telling the user how to run the clang static analyzer which
provides a better diagnostic.  This analysis phase is described in more detail
below.

#### Changes to the device code split algorithm

The algorithm for splitting device functions into images must be changed to
account for the *Used* aspects of each kernel or exported device function.  The
goal is to ensure that two kernels or exported device functions are only
bundled together into the same device image if their *Used* sets are identical.

We must also split two kernels into different device images if they have

> different `[[sycl::reqd_sub_group_size()]]` or different

Reviewer 5: Note: our SubGroups extension supports [`named_sub_group_size` attribute](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/SubGroup/SYCL_INTEL_sub_group.asciidoc#attributes) which should probably be taken into account here as well

Author: Thanks for pointing this out.  I know about that DPC++ extension, but I don't think I've seen a design document for it.  I presume this will rely on an underlying SPIR-V extension?  Do you know if there is a proposed document for that SPIR-V extension?  The details of the SPIR-V extension might influence how the kernel bundling should work.

It seems like there are two options for the bundling which might make sense:

1. Allow kernels with sub-group size `primary` to be bundled together with kernels that have no required sub-group size.  (This makes sense because `primary` is the default.)  Or,

2. Allow kernels with sub-group size `automatic` and `primary` to be bundled together with each other and with kernels that have no required sub-group size.

Option (1) is clearly safer, but I can't think of any reason why option (2) would cause problems.

Tagging @Pennycook since he is the author of that DPC++ extension.

Author: I changed the design document to handle this case in a818156a5c94c178791334b76bca83bb59d70e56.  I think my option (2) is safe, so that's what I chose.

listed above.

#### Create the "SYCL/image-requirements" property set

The DPC++ runtime needs some way to know about the *Used* aspects, required
sub-group size, and required work-group size of an image.  Therefore, the
post-link tool provides this information in a new property set named
"SYCL/image-requirements".

The following table lists the properties that this set may contain and their
types:

Property Name             | Property Type
-------------             | -------------
"aspect"                  | `PI_PROPERTY_TYPE_BYTE_ARRAY`
"reqd\_sub\_group\_size"  | `PI_PROPERTY_TYPE_BYTE_ARRAY`
"reqd\_work\_group\_size" | `PI_PROPERTY_TYPE_BYTE_ARRAY`

There is an "aspect" property if the image's *Used* set is not empty.  The
value of the property is an array of `uint32` values, where each `uint32` value
is the numerical value of an aspect from `enum class aspect`.  The size of the
property (which is always divisible by `4`) tells the number of aspects in the
array.

There is a "reqd\_sub\_group\_size" property if the image contains any kernels
with a required sub-group size.  The value of the property is a `uint32` value

> that tells the required size.  (The device code split algorithm ensures that

Reviewer 5: Here we should also take into account `auto` and `primary` sub-group sizes from `named_sub_group_size` attribute

Author: Agreed.  Done in a818156a5c94c178791334b76bca83bb59d70e56

!1 = !{i32 8, i32 9}
!2 = !{i32 8}
```

### Changes to the DPC++ front-end

The front-end of the device compiler is responsible for parsing the
`[[sycl::requires()]]` and `[[sycl_detail::uses_aspects()]]` attributes and
transferring the information to the LLVM IR metadata described above according
to the following rules:

* If the translation unit contains any type definitions that are decorated with
  `[[sycl_detail::uses_aspects()]]`, the front-end creates an
  `!intel_types_that_use_aspects` metadata describing the aspects used by all
  such types.

* If a function is decorated with `[[sycl_detail::uses_aspects()]]`, the
  front-end adds an `!intel_used_aspects` metadata to the function's definition
  listing the aspects from that attribute.

* If a function is decorated with `[[sycl::requires()]]`, the front-end adds
  an `!intel_declared_aspects` metadata to the function's definition listing
  the aspects from that attribute.

### New LLVM IR pass to propagate aspect usage

We add a new IR phase to the device compiler which does the following:

* Creates (or augments) a function's `!intel_used_aspects` metadata with
  aspects that come from references to types in the

>   `intel_types_that_use_aspects` list.

Reviewer 5: @AaronBallman, @erichkeane, how hard/easy/feasible would it be to populate list of used aspects with ones which are attached to types used within a function in FE?

I'm asking, because doing so at LLVM IR level would be expensive, I think. My concerns are:
- AFAIK there are no way to easily grab a list of all types used within a function, which means that we will have to go through every argument of every instruction within a function and check its type
- Since types are encoded in metadata as strings, we will have to perform not-so-cheap string comparison to understand whether it is a type we are looking for or not
- According to [`llvm::Type`](https://llvm.org/doxygen/classllvm_1_1Type.html) class definition, only struct types have names, which means that if we need to attach an aspect to a non-aggregate type or to an aggregate other than struct, then we have to come up with some naming scheme for that. @gmlueck, I assume that we will anyway provide access to some "native" types through some wrappers/aliases, so we should be always able to annotate that wrapper. However, some optimizations could unwrap the type and pass it directly - in that case we will loose the annotation

Author: I agree that encoding the type reference in the metadata as a string seems kind of gross.  I think @erichkeane said that there is some precedent for doing this in clang, though.

How do LLVM IR instructions reference a type?  I assume this is done through some sort of ID?  I presume IR instructions do not reference a type via a string.  Is it possible for a value in a metadata node to be one of these type IDs?  It seems like that would be a lot more efficient than referencing by string.

Reviewer 7: @AlexeySachkov : Detecting all uses within a function is quite difficult, we'd have to go through every single level of the AST with some custom code to detect when/where that is used.  It becomes REALLY difficult/time consuming to do in the CFE.

Reviewer 5: > How do LLVM IR instructions reference a type? I assume this is done through some sort of ID? I presume IR instructions do not reference a type via a string. Is it possible for a value in a metadata node to be one of these type IDs? It seems like that would be a lot more efficient than referencing by string.

They are referenced through pointer to a corresponding class. I guess we are able to optimize the search by retrieving a `Type *` based on a string encoded into a metadata and later comparing it with `Type *` encoded in each instruction; but that would still require analysis of each instruction of each function in a module

Author: That's a good suggestion to optimize the search.  I added it as a note, so we don't forget it.  See 29a2e9f504372d40c1487a569f95b4079d1ab4ba.

* Diagnoses a warning if any function that has `!intel_declared_aspects` uses
  an aspect not listed in that declared set.

It is important that this IR phase runs before any other optimization phase
that might eliminate a reference to a type or inline a function call because
such optimizations will cause us to miss information about aspects that are
used.  Therefore, it is recommended that this new phase run first, before all
other IR phases.

Implementing the first bullet point is straightforward.  The implementation can
scan the IR for each function looking for instructions that reference a type.
It can then see if that type is in the `!intel_types_that_use_aspects` set; if
so it adds the type's aspects to the function's `!intel_used_aspects` set.
While doing this, the implementation must have a special case for the `double`
type because the front-end does not include that type in the
`!intel_types_that_use_aspects` set.  If a function references the `double`
type, the implementation implicitly assumes that the function uses
`aspect::fp64` and adds that aspect to the function's `!intel_used_aspects`
set.

The second bullet point requires building the static call graph, but the

> implementation need not scan the instructions in each function.  Instead, it

Reviewer 5: We do have to scan instructions in order to build call graph. LLVM doesn't store information about call graph anywhere in `Function`, `Module`, or other entities.

Author: I think the call graph can be built during the IR scan that is required for the first bullet.

I wasn't sure how much detail we should add to these design documents.  Do you want me to make a note of that?

Reviewer 5: >I wasn't sure how much detail we should add to these design documents. Do you want me to make a note of that?

No, I think the wording is ok

  that this implies that kernels decorated with
  `[[intel::named_sub_group_size(automatic)]]` can be bundled together with
  kernels that are decorated with `[[intel::named_sub_group_size(primary)]]`
  and that either of these kernels could be bundled with a kernel that has no
  required sub-group size.)

These criteria are an additional filter applied to the device code split
algorithm after taking into account the `-fsycl-device-code-split` command line
option.  If the user requests `per_kernel` device code split, then each kernel
is already in its own device image, so no further splitting is required.  If
the user requests any other option, device code is first split according to
that option, and then another split is performed to ensure that each device
image contains only kernels or exported device functions that meet the criteria
listed above.

#### Create the "SYCL/image-requirements" property set

The DPC++ runtime needs some way to know about the *Used* aspects, required
sub-group size, and required work-group size of an image.  Therefore, the
post-link tool provides this information in a new property set named

> "SYCL/image-requirements".

Reviewer 8: this probably not the best place to discuss this, but having the word "image" used in identifiers for both device images and images (pictures) can be confusing. Can we call the former "device images", especially when used in property names and other identifiers?

Author: That's a good point.  I propose we rename the property set to "SYCL/device-requirements".  I think this makes sense because it lists the requirements that a device must have in order to use this binary image.

Any objections?

Author: The property set is renamed in 0e479767de1486f42f36c621cee5e2f3a18208fb.

[this separate PR][6] into this design document.

[6]: <https://github.com/gmlueck/llvm/pull/1>

### Changes to the DPC++ runtime

The DPC++ runtime must be changed to check if a kernel uses any optional
features that the device does not support.  If this happens, the runtime must
raise a synchronous `errc::kernel_not_supported` exception.

When the application submits a kernel to a device, the runtime identifies all
the other device images that export device functions which are needed by the
kernel as described in [Device Code Dynamic Linking][4].  Before the runtime
actually links these images together, it compares each image's
"SYCL/image-requirements" against the features provided by the target
device.  If any of the following checks fail, the runtime throws
`errc::kernel_not_supported`:

* The "aspect" property contains an aspect that is not provided by the device,
  or
* The "reqd\_sub\_group\_size" property contains a sub-group size that the
  device does not support.

There is no way currently for the runtime to query the work-group sizes that a
device supports, so the "reqd\_work\_group\_size" property is not checked.  We

> include this property in the set nonetheless for possible future use.

Reviewer 8: There are a lot of exceptions in this document about `reqd_work_group_size` (and friend).  Maybe it simply isn't a good match for being an optional kernel feature.  Perhaps it might be best to _not_ include it now. Wouldn't that simplify things?

Author: [Section 5.7. "Optional kernel features"](https://www.khronos.org/registry/SYCL/specs/sycl-2020/html/sycl-2020.html#sec:optional-kernel-features) of the SYCL 2020 spec lists both `reqd_work_group_size` and `reqd_sub_group_size` as optional kernel features, so I think the design needs to account for them.

from a shared library as defined by [Device Code Dynamic Linking][5].

[5]: <https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/SharedLibraries.md>

### The FE compiler

The term "FE compiler" refers to the entire DPC++ compiler chain that runs
when the user executes the `clang++` command.  This includes the clang
front-end itself, all passes over LLVM IR, the post-link tool, and any AOT
compilation phases (when the user compiles in AOT mode).  The FE compiler does
not include the JIT compiler which translates SPIR-V (or another IL format)
into native code when the application executes.

## Requirements

There are several categories of requirements covered by this design.  Each of
these is described in more detail in the sections that follow:

* The FE compiler must issue a diagnostic in some cases when a kernel or device
  function uses an optional feature.  However, the FE compiler must **not**
  generate a diagnostic in other cases.

* The runtime must raise an exception when a kernel using optional features
  is submitted to a device that does not support those features.  This
  exception must be raised synchronously from the kernel invocation command

>   (e.g. `parallel_for()`).

Author: This requirement is from the SYCL 2020 specification:

> Of course, applications that make use of optional kernel features should ensure that a kernel using such a feature is submitted only to a device that supports the feature. If the application submits a command group using a secondary queue, then any kernel submitted from the command group should use only features that are supported by both the primary queue’s device and the secondary queue’s device. If an application fails to do this, the implementation must throw a synchronous exception with the `errc::kernel_not_supported` error code from the kernel invocation command (e.g. `parallel_for()`).

https://www.khronos.org/registry/SYCL/specs/sycl-2020/html/sycl-2020.html#sec:optional-kernel-features

In general, our philosophy is to diagnose runtime errors by throwing an exception from the API that causes the error whenever this is reasonably possible.  We think this makes it easier for applications to know the cause of a failure.  For example, if the exception is thrown from the `submit()` call, it might not be clear if the error is from `paralle_for()` or from constructing an accessor, etc.

Is there a reason why you think the exception should be delayed and thrown from `submit()` rather than from `parallel_for()`?

>   (e.g. `parallel_for()`).

Reviewer 9: >> Is there a reason why you think the exception should be delayed and thrown from submit() rather than from parallel_for()?

It's related to how things are currently implemented. Currently we record everything that happens in the CG lambda(like "accessor created", "kernel execution requested") doing only basic API related checks, then when CG is executed we send this request to the scheduler component which may or may not construct low-level handles and enqueue low-level operations immediately(it depends on the situation). Most of the errors coming from the last step.

Also there are complains that `queue::submit` call is taking too much time of the calling thread, so eventually we might want to move as much as we can to a separate(dispatcher) thread. If we did so we would not be able to throw synchronous exceptions for most of things that currently happen during `queue::submit` anymore.

>> For example, if the exception is thrown from the submit() call, it might not be clear if the error is from paralle_for() or from constructing an accessor, etc.

CG lambda can have only one "action"(kernel execution or memcpy or ...), the exception "errc::kernel_not_supported" is quite specific, so I think it would be quite hard to not understand that it happens because `queue::submit` asks to execute an "incompatible" kernel.

>   (e.g. `parallel_for()`).

Author: > CG lambda can have only one "action"(kernel execution or memcpy or ...), the exception "errc::kernel_not_supported" is quite specific, so I think it would be quite hard to not understand that it happens because queue::submit asks to execute an "incompatible" kernel.

I agree that it would be clear in this case.  However, there are other exceptions that could be thrown in the "submit" function, especially related to accessors.  The SYCL spec expects these to be thrown from the API that causes the error (e.g. from the `accessor` constructor if the parameters to the accessor are invalid), not delayed and thrown from the `queue::submit()` function.  These exceptions would not be clear if they were delayed because the submit function could construct many accessors.

Does DPC++ currently delay these exceptions also until the kernel submission function returns?

> Also there are complains that queue::submit call is taking too much time of the calling thread, so eventually we might want to move as much as we can to a separate(dispatcher) thread.

I'm curious about what we do now in the calling thread.  Does the JIT compilation happen currently in the calling thread, or is this already scheduled on a separate thread?  Note that we were careful to design the `errc::kernel_not_supported` exception such that it could be diagnosed in the calling thread even before attempting to JIT compile the kernel, thus allowing the JIT compilation to happen on a different thread.

  must be thrown if the kernel uses a feature that the device does not support.

* For a kernel that is decorated with `[[sycl::requires()]]`, the exception
  must be thrown if the device does not have the aspects listed in that
  attribute.  Note that the exception must be thrown even if the kernel does
  not actually use a feature corresponding to the aspect, and it must be
  thrown even if the aspect does not correspond to any optional feature.

* For a kernel that is decorated with `[[sycl::requires()]]`, the FE compiler
  will mostly check (at compile time) whether the kernel uses any features that
  are not listed in the attribute.  However, this check only results in a
  warning, so the runtime is still responsible for throwing the exception if
  any of the functions called by the kernel uses an optional feature that the
  device does not support.

* For a kernel that is decorated with the `[[sycl::reqd_work_group_size(W)]]`
  or `[[sycl::reqd_sub_group_size(S)]]` attribute, the exception must be thrown
  if the device does not support the work group size `W` or the sub-group size
  `S`.

Note that the exception must be thrown synchronously, not delayed and thrown on

> the queue's asynchronous handler.

Reviewer 9: Could you please clarify why this is a requirement? 
In the current implementation it's easy to throw a synchronous exception, but it can be a
restriction for the implementation in future.

Author: See my response to your other comment.

The overall design is as follows.  The DPC++ installation includes a
configuration file that has one entry for each device that it supports. Each
entry lists the set of aspects that the device supports and a list of the
sub-group sizes that it supports.  DPC++ then consults this configuration
file to decide whether to invoke a particular AOT compiler on each device IR
module, using the information from the module's "SYCL/image-requirements"
property set.

#### Device configuration file

The configuration file uses a simple YAML format where each top-level key is
a name of a device architecture. These names correspond to SYCL aspect enum
identifiers as defined in the [TBD] API header. There are sub-keys under each
device for the supported aspects, sub-group sizes and AOT compiler ID.  For
example:

```
gen11_1:
  aspects: [1, 2, 3]
  sub-group-sizes: [8, 16]
  aot-compiler-id: gen-spir64
gen_icl:
  aspects: [2, 3]
  sub-group-sizes: [8, 16]
  aot-compiler-id: gen-spir64
x86_64_avx512:
  aspects: [1, 2, 3, 9, 11]
  sub-group-sizes: [8, 32]
  aot-compiler-id: x86-spir64
```

The values of the aspects in this configuration file can be the numerical

> values from the `enum class aspect` enumeration or the enum identifer itself.

Reviewer: > I think we should only allow the numerical aspect values in the configuration file, otherwise we set up a needless dependency between tools that read the configuration file and the set of aspects supported in DPC++.
...
> Although I agree that aspect names are more human readable, I think this config file will be used only by ninja programmers. These users will be happy enough if the configuration file contains only aspect numbers.

Yes, I understand there is certain inconvenience for the compiler writer, but I thought of config file as a human-editable file, and this is actually one of its main purposes. Numbers seem very error-prone to me. Anyway there would have to be some place where people need to take the arch -> number from. So I believe readability is a good reason. I'd actually prefer that only mnemonics are allowed in the config file and not the numbers.

> No code needs to change if we add a new aspect in the future.

I don't think using mnemonics in the config file is anyhow different in this regard. Not to require code changes in case of numbers, we'd have to speculatively pre-populate the arch enum with numbers corresponding to new arch. Likewise we can do this using mnemonics. Start with
```
... {
  Gen_TGL,
  Gen_future_arch1,
  Gen_future_arch2
};
```
then when arch is finalized
... {
  Gen_TGL,
  Gen_future_arch1,
  Gen_future_arch2,
  Gen_concrete_arch1 = Gen_future_arch1,
  Gen_concrete_arch2 = Gen_future_arch2
};
```
If we could find a way not to hardcode specific arch at all (like my earlier example with arch aspect templated by sequence of chars), that would be even better, IMO.

> values from the `enum class aspect` enumeration or the enum identifer itself.

Author: > I don't think using mnemonics in the config file is anyhow different in this regard.

I think you are only considering the case where an aspect represents the name of an architecture.  There will be many aspects that corresponds to features or other characteristics of a device.  To give some examples, we already have aspects named `atomic64` (indicating that a device supports 64-bit atomics and `gpu` (indicating that a device is a GPU).  We are likely to add more aspects like this.  Do you want to maintain a table mapping all of these aspect names to their numbers?

> but I thought of config file as a human-editable file, and this is actually one of its main purposes.

I thought we planned to provide a tool that generates the config file somehow.  For example, I think it would be easy to provide a tool that the user must run on the device, and that tool will generate the config information from that device.  In such a case, the user doesn't ever read or modify the config file directly.

> values from the `enum class aspect` enumeration or the enum identifer itself.

Reviewer: > Do you want to maintain a table mapping all of these aspect names to their numbers?

yes. This mapping could be maintained automatically using e.g. TableGen tool, which would generate needed enums or strings or maps from a single source. 
The main question though is if we agree that aspects should be mnemonics rather than numbers.
@kbsmith-intel - your comment would be appreciated.

> I thought we planned to provide a tool that generates the config file somehow
Yes, I agree that we planned. Not sure about the point are trying to make, though. Do you mean my statement about human readability being one of the main purposes contradicts this anyhow? I don't see how then.
Why wouldn't we generate a binary then if we don't care about human readability? Beside of auto-generation we want that people can create/adjust it manually.

> values from the `enum class aspect` enumeration or the enum identifer itself.

Author: > Yes, I agree that we planned. Not sure about the point are trying to make, though. Do you mean my statement about human readability being one of the main purposes contradicts this anyhow? I don't see how then.
Why wouldn't we generate a binary then if we don't care about human readability? Beside of auto-generation we want that people can create/adjust it manually.

Yes, my point was that if we provide a tool that generates the config file then humans won't be the primary way that this config file is created.  Therefore, it becomes less important for the aspects to be represented by name (vs. numeric values).

Of course, it does not make sense for the config file to be binary.  It's still important that humans can update the file if absolutely necessary.  For example, an AE might tell customer how to update the file as a workaround.  I'm just saying that human update will probably not be the primary method of updating this file.

I actually don't feel that strongly about this.  The only downside to storing the aspects as names (vs. numbers) is the engineering and maintenance cost.  If you feel this benefit is worth this extra cost, then I have no objection.

> values from the `enum class aspect` enumeration or the enum identifer itself.

Reviewer: Yes, I think this is important for the feature to be really useful. @kbsmith-intel - what would be your preference for aspect specification in the config file - numeric or symbolic (mnemonic)?

For each valid AOT compiler ID the driver has a built-in rule how to construct
an AOT compilation command line based on given architecture name. For example,
for the `gen11_1` and `gen_icl` architectures, the driver sees `gen-spir64`
as the AOT compiler ID, so it knows that the `ocloc` tool must be used, and it
also knows how to translate the `gen11_1` or `gen_icl` to proper `ocloc`

> architecture specification option.

Reviewer: The advantage is that we decouple architecture (stem) from the AOT compiler. With it we may map any architecture to any AOT compiler. For Intel AOT compilers we likely don't need this, I agree. I don't have strong preference for `aot-compiler-id`. 

Another note is that the actual user-friendly architectures in `-fsycl-targets` should look like gen_<sub_arch>, I don't think we need to repeat spir64 in it. It should map 1:1 to aspect enum identifiers.

> architecture specification option.

Author: > The advantage is that we decouple architecture (stem) from the AOT compiler. With it we may map any architecture to any AOT compiler. For Intel AOT compilers we likely don't need this, I agree. I don't have strong preference for aot-compiler-id.

I think I see your intent, but it seems like it has limited value because the compiler driver still needs to have built-in knowledge about how to construct the command line for the AOT command.  I think this could be useful if the config file abstracted away all the knowledge about invoking the AOT command.  For example:

```
gen11_1:
  aspects: [1, 2, 3]
  sub-group-sizes: [8, 16]
  aot-compiler-command: ocloc -file ${SPIRV} -spirv_input -output ${BINARY} -output_no_suffix -device gen11
```

This would abstract away all knowledge of the command line from the compiler driver.  It just needs to substitute the `${SPIRV}` and `${BINARY}` pseudo-variables.  However, I realize that's a lot more work.  If we wanted to do this, it seems like it might be better as a separate design document.

In the short term, it seems better to me to eliminate `aot-compiler-id` until we can make it more general.

> architecture specification option.

Reviewer: let's start with no `aot-compiler-id`, can be added later if needed w/o breaking backward compatibility

> architecture specification option.

Reviewer 6: > aot-compiler-command: ocloc -file ${SPIRV} -spirv_input -output ${BINARY} -output_no_suffix -device gen11

This seems like a possibly significant security problem.  I am pretty sure I wouldn't want the driver execing off some arbitrary command that the user can control via this file.

> architecture specification option.

Author: Removed in 722e4ca76464489ee4062209e481d212d33aeef2

> architecture specification option.

Reviewer 2: > This seems like a possibly significant security problem. I am pretty sure I wouldn't want the driver execing off some arbitrary command that the user can control via this file.

I agree! However, is this roughly the same concern as a makefile's ability to spawn arbitrary commands as part of the user's build system, or is it worse for some reason?

> architecture specification option.

Reviewer 6: IMO, it is worse, because the driver and this architecture is designed by Intel, and thus we will be responsible for any security issues arising from it.

to an individual output module, and each element of a row is a name of a file
containing necessary information about the module, such as the code itself, its
properties.

At the action graph building stage for each requested AOT compilation target -
SPIR-V-based (such as Gen targets) and/or non-SPIR-V-based (such as PTX) - the
driver adds an `aspect-filter` action which filters out input file table rows
with device code modules using features unsupported on current target. Then the
output table goes as input into the AOT stage, and the prior filtering
guarantees that the AOT compiler will not encounter device code it can't
compile. In the extreme case when all device code
modules use unsupported aspects, the input file table will be empty. The picture
below illustrates the action graph built by the clang driver along with file
lists and tables generated and consumed by various nodes of the graph. The
example set of targets used for the illustration is 4 targets
- spir64 (runtime JITted SPIR-V)
- AOT targets
    - non-SPIR-V based
        - nvptx (PTX)
    - SPIR-V based
        - gen_11 (Intel Gen)
        - x86_64_avx512 (AVX512)
<br>
<br>

> ![Device SPIRV translation and AOT compilation](images/DeviceLinkAOTAndWrap.svg)

Reviewer: 1. Makes sense
2. Yes, I noticed that too - I'll fix it
3. non SPIR-V/ptx is not actual parameter, it is a "mode" to illustrate the divergence. I'll see what I can do.

As I mentioned, I will extract this into a separate PR, as it is big and independent enough by itself - let's continue review of this part there.

- the input file table filtered as needed

In more details, the tool performs the following actions:
1) Checks if the input file table contains "Properties" column. If not, copies
   the input file table to output and exits without error.
1) Reads in the device configuration file and finds some entry `E` corresponding
   to the architecture given on the command line. If there is no such entry -
   reports and error and exits.
1) For each row in the input file table:
   - loads the properties file from the "Properties" column
   - checks if there is the `SYCL/image-requirements` property
   - if no, copies current row to the output file table and goes to the next
   - if yes, checks if all the requirements listed in the property are supported
     by the target architecture as specified in the device configuration file
       - if yes, copies current row to the output file table and goes to the
         next
       - otherwise skips this row

##### Configuration file location and driver option

A default device configuration file is supplied as a part of OneAPI SDK. It is
located in the TBD directory. Users may override the defalt using the
```
-fsycl-device-config-file=<path>
```

> option.

Author: There is an important part of design that is not described anywhere.  The parameters to the `-fsycl-targets` command line option need to change.  Currently, those parameters must be one of the following strings:

* spir64-unknown-unknown-sycldevice
* spir64_x86_64-unknown-unknown-sycldevice
* spir64_fpga-unknown-unknown-sycldevice
* spir64_gen-unknown-unknown-sycldevice

But, it seems like this design only works if we change the parameter to match the strings that are used as device names in the configuration file (`gen11_1`, `gen_icl`, etc.)

In addition, we currently tell users to pass an option like `-Xs -device *` in order to specify the exact device to generate AOT code for.  This won't work anymore, so I think the design doc should state this.

Reviewer: > The parameters to the -fsycl-targets command line option need to change.

certainly. As I mentioned, I would very much prefer that all arch specifications are consistent across various places - aspect enums, config file, arch specification via -fsycl-targets.
To maintain backward compatibility, we need to still support the long older variants too.

Reviewer: Created https://github.com/gmlueck/llvm/pull/1

  speculative compilation of a kernel for a device, when the application does
  not specifically submit the kernel to that device.

> ### Clarification of a kernel's static call tree

Reviewer: Nit: In general case this is a graph rather than a tree. A -> B, A -> C, B -> D, C -> D

Author: I updated the wording to say "static call graph" instead of "tree".
